arXiv:1807.08767v2  [gr-qc]  18 Sep 2018
Center-of-mass angular momentum and memory eﬀect in asympt otically ﬂat
spacetimes
David A. Nichols 1, 2, ∗
1Gravitation Astroparticle Physics Amsterdam (GRAPPA), Un iversity of Amsterdam,
Science Park, P.O. Box 94485, 1090 GL Amsterdam, The Netherl ands
2Department of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Faculty of Science,
Radboud University, P.O. Box 9010, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The Net herlands
Gravitational-wave (GW) memory eﬀects are constant change s in the GW strain and its time
integrals, which are closely connected to changes in the cha rges that characterize asymptotically ﬂat
spacetimes. The ﬁrst GW memory eﬀect discovered was a lastin g change in the GW strain. It can
occur when GWs or massless ﬁelds carry away 4-momentum from a n isolated source. Subsequently,
it was shown that ﬂuxes of intrinsic angular momentum can gen erate a new type of memory eﬀect
called the spin memory, which is an enduring change in a porti on of the time integral of the GW
strain. In this paper, we note that there is another new type o f memory eﬀect. We call it the
center-of-mass (CM) memory eﬀect , because it is related to changes in the CM part of the angular
momentum of a spacetime. We ﬁrst examine a few properties of t he CM angular momentum.
Speciﬁcally, we describe how it transforms under the supert ranslation symmetry transformations
of the Bondi-Metzner-Sachs group, and we compute a new expre ssion for the ﬂux of CM angular
momentum carried by GWs in terms of a set of radiative multipo le moments of the GW strain. We
then turn to the CM memory eﬀect. The CM memory eﬀect appears i n a quantity which has the
units of the time integral of the GW strain. We deﬁne the eﬀect in asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes
that start in a stationary state, radiate, and settle to a diﬀ erent stationary state. We show that
it is invariant under inﬁnitesimal supertranslation symme tries in this context. To determine the
magnitude of the ﬂux of CM angular momentum and the CM memory e ﬀect, we compute these
quantities for nonspinning, quasicircular compact binari es in the post-Newtonian approximation.
The CM memory eﬀect arises from terms in the gravitational wa veform for such binaries beginning
at third and fourth post-Newtonian order for unequal- and eq ual-mass binaries, respectively. Finally,
we estimate the amplitude of the CM memory eﬀect for these bin aries. We anticipate that it will
be unlikely for current or upcoming GW detectors to measure t he eﬀect.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 2
II. Properties of the ﬂux of (super) angular
momentum 3
A. Aspects of the Bondi-Sachs framework 3
B. Stationary and nonradiative regions and
transitions between these regions 4
C. Symmetries, charges, and ﬂuxes 6
D. Transformation properties of (super) angular
momentum under supertranslations 7
E. Center-of-mass part of (super) angular
momentum and its ﬂux 9
F. Multipole expansion of the ﬂux of CM
angular momentum carried by GWs 10
III. Center-of-mass gravitational-wave memory
eﬀect 12
A. Rationale for the existence of the CM
memory eﬀect 12
B. Deﬁnition and properties of the CM memory
eﬀect 13
∗ d.a.nichols@uva.nl
C. Multipolar expansion of the CM memory
eﬀect 14
IV. Flux of CM angular momentum and CM memory
in the PN approximation 15
A. Summary of selected results from PN theory 15
B. Flux of CM angular momentum 17
C. Center-of-mass GW memory eﬀect 18
1. Nonlinear and null part of the CM
memory 18
2. Ordinary part of the CM memory 19
D. GW modes that produce the CM memory
eﬀect 20
1. Nonlinear and null part of the CM
memory 20
2. Ordinary part of the CM memory 21
E. Comparison with existing PN results 21
F. Discussion of PN results 22
V. Conclusions 23
Acknowledgments 23
References 24
2
I. INTRODUCTION
Far from an isolated gravitating source, spacetime can
be described as asymptotically ﬂat if it satisﬁes the con-
ditions set forth by Bondi et al. [
1] and Sachs [ 2, 3]
(see also, e.g., the review [ 4]). These spacetimes en-
compass the asymptotic region of a wide range of in-
teresting astrophysical systems. The gravitational wave-
forms used for detecting the ﬁve binary-black-hole merg-
ers by the LIGO-Virgo Collaboration [
5–9] and the one
binary-neutron-star merger [ 10], for example, are de-
termined from numerical simulations with asymptoti-
cally ﬂat boundary conditions. The symmetry group
of asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes is the Bondi-Metzner-
Sachs (BMS) group, which consists of the Lorentz trans-
formations and an inﬁnite-dimensional, abelian group
called the supertranslations. The supertranslations in-
clude the four spacetime translations, but they predate
and are not related to supersymmetry. Related to all the
inﬁnitesimal BMS symmetries are corresponding charges
(see, e.g., [
11]). For the Lorentz symmetries, the con-
jugate charges are the angular momenta [which can be
split into the spin and center-of-mass (CM) parts]; for
the supertranslations, the charges are called supermo-
menta (by analogy with how the charges related to the
four spacetime translations are called 4-momenta).
More recently, the symmetries of asymptotically ﬂat
spacetimes have been reexamined, and larger symmetry
algebras than the BMS algebra have been proposed (see,
e.g., [
12–15]). The extensions of the BMS algebra in-
volve enlargements of the Lorentz part of the algebra,
and the conjugate charges can be thought of as general-
izations of relativistic angular momentum. These charges
were called superspin and super CM in [
16], by analogy
with nomenclatures used to describe the Lorentz charges
and the supermomentum charges. Collectively, we will
call these charges “super angular momentum” (though
they have also been called super-rotation charges [
17]
after the name given to the extended symmetry vector
ﬁelds). Thus, there may be an inﬁnite number of ad-
ditional charges that characterize an asymptotically ﬂat
spacetime. These charges have garnered much attention
recently, because they, and related quantities on black-
hole horizons, were proposed as a type of “soft hair” on
black holes that could be a part of the resolution to the
black-hole-information paradox [
18].
The super angular momentum and the supermomen-
tum are also of interest because of their relation to
gravitational-wave (GW) memory eﬀects. The ﬁrst GW
memory eﬀect discovered—which in this paper we will
simply refer to as the GW memory eﬀect
1—is charac-
terized by a nonzero change in the GW strain between
1 There seem to be two competing naming systems for GW mem-
ory eﬀects: one is based on the type of physical eﬀect that cou ld
be measured as a consequence of the GW memory; the other
employs the name of the ﬂux of the “conserved” quantity which
early and late times. In an idealized detector composed
of freely falling test masses, the GW memory causes the
proper distance of the masses before and after the GWs
have passed through the detector to diﬀer. The GW
memory was initially computed within the context of lin-
earized gravity by Zel’dovich and Polnarev [
20], and it
was subsequently computed in full (nonlinear) general
relativity by Christodoulou [
21]. Note, however, that
the idea of a nonlinear GW memory eﬀect dates back
(at least) to Payne [
22] (including the notion that the
memory is related to supertranslation symmetries and to
Weinberg’s soft theorem [
23]) as well as to an unpub-
lished habilitation thesis, of which certain results were
later published in [
24] (see [ 25] for more detail). 2 The
sources of the GW memory are changes in the super-
momentum charges and in the quadrupole and higher-
multipole moments of the ﬂux of 4-momentum radiated
in massless ﬁelds and GWs (see, e.g., [
16, 27, 28]).
Pasterski et al. [29] also realized that there can be a
new kind of GW memory eﬀect, which they called the
spin memory eﬀect . The spin memory is characterized by
a change in the time integral of the magnetic-parity part
of the GW strain.
3 It can be measured by a Sagnac de-
tector following a particular accelerating trajectory [ 29]
or by a family of freely falling observers surrounding a
source of GWs [
31]. The sources of the spin memory are
changes in the superspin charges or in the quadrupole and
higher-multipole moments of the ﬂux of intrinsic part of
the angular momentum carried by massless ﬁelds and
GWs [
16]. The spin memory also has a signature in
the gravitational waveform from compact binaries that
could be detected by third-generation GW observato-
ries [
19], such as the Einstein Telescope [ 32] and Cosmic
Explorer [ 33].
There has not yet been any discussion of a memory
eﬀect related to changes in the quadrupole and higher
multipole moments of the ﬂux of the CM portion of the
angular momentum or in the super-CM charges. We ﬁnd
that there can be such an eﬀect, which we call the center-
can act as a source of the corresponding memory eﬀect. Thus,
the two nomenclatures would suggest calling it the displace ment
memory (as in [
19]) or the 4-momentum (or supermomentum)
memory (a name that, as far as we can tell, has never been used) .
However, because this is the ﬁrst memory eﬀect discovered, w e
will opt against adding cumbersome modiﬁers and simply refe r
to it as the GW memory eﬀect (and we will typically drop the
emphasis on the word “the” hereafter).
2 It seems plausible to argue that the GW memory in full general
relativity was previously realized as a possibility by Newm an and
Penrose (see the discussion in [
26]); however, we will not attempt
to settle the question of the ﬁrst reference to the GW memory
eﬀect here.
3 By “magnetic-parity part,” we mean the part that can be de-
composed into magnetic-parity tensor spherical harmonics (see,
e.g., [
30] for a review of these harmonics). This turns out to be
equivalent to the part parameterized by the scalar function Ψ in
Eq. ( 3.9). It is also sometimes called just the “magnetic part,”
for short.
3
of-mass (CM) memory eﬀect .4 Deﬁning this eﬀect, un-
derstanding its properties, and computing the eﬀect from
nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries are all goals
of this paper. To help reach these goals, we will also need
to discuss the properties of the ﬂux of CM angular mo-
mentum and the context in which the CM memory eﬀect
is deﬁned. We organize the discussion of these topics as
follows.
In Sec.
II, we review some properties of the ﬂux of
(super) angular momentum in asymptotically ﬂat space-
times. We ﬁrst provide some background on the Bondi-
Sachs framework, the space of stationary and nonra-
diative solutions of Einstein’s equations in asymptoti-
cally ﬂat spacetimes, and BMS symmetries and their
corresponding charges and ﬂuxes. We then discuss how
changes in the (super) angular momentum transform un-
der supertranslations and how they can be interpreted
physically. Even for spacetimes that start in a stationary
state, radiate, and then settle to a diﬀerent stationary
state (a stationary-to-stationary transition), the changes
in the charges can transform nontrivially. We also give
an expression for the ﬂux of CM angular momentum car-
ried by GWs, when the GW strain is expanded in a set
of radiative multipole moments.
In Sec.
III, we introduce the CM memory eﬀect, we dis-
cuss the context in which it is deﬁned, and we show that
it is invariant under inﬁnitesimal BMS supertranslation
symmetry transformations. We also give an expression
for the CM memory eﬀect in terms of multipole moments
of the GW strain in this part.
The results of Secs.
II and III are then used in Sec. IV
to compute the leading-order expressions for the CM
memory eﬀect and ﬂux of CM angular momentum for
nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries in the post-
Newtonian (PN) approximation. We ﬁnd that both
equal- and unequal-mass binaries have a CM memory
eﬀect, but the leading-PN-order sources of these mem-
ory eﬀects come from the ordinary and null parts of the
memory, respectively (using the terminology of Bieri and
Garﬁnkle [
27]). When we estimate the amplitude of the
part of the gravitational waveform responsible for the
CM memory, we ﬁnd that both the null and the ordinary
parts will be unlikely to be observed (though for diﬀerent
reasons), even for the next generation of ground-based
GW detectors, such as the Einstein Telescope or Cosmic
Explorer. We conclude in Sec.
V.
Throughout this paper we use units in which G =c =
1, and we use the conventions for spacetime indices and
metric and curvature tensors given in [
34].
4 Note that we follow the convention of naming the memory eﬀect
after the type of charge that can generate the eﬀect when it
varies in time. The primary reason for this is to maintain a
parallel with the naming of the spin memory eﬀect. A secondar y
reason is that the measurable eﬀect related to the CM memory
is somewhat involved (as we discuss later), and it does not le nd
itself to a simple name.
II. PROPER TIES OF THE FLUX OF (SUPER)
ANGULAR MOMENTUM
Before discussing the properties of the ﬂux of (super)
angular momentum and the interpretation of the CM
part of the ﬂux, we brieﬂy review a few features of the
Bondi-Sachs framework that will be needed throughout
this paper.
A. Aspects of the Bondi-Sachs framework
The metric of asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes can be ex-
pressed in Bondi coordinates, ( u,r,θ A) (where A = 1, 2).
These coordinates are a retarded time ( u), an aﬃne pa-
rameter along outgoing null rays as well as an areal ra-
dius (r), and coordinates on a 2-sphere ( θA). The general
form of the metric and the corresponding Einstein equa-
tions were derived assuming axisymmetry in [
1]. Sub-
sequently, in Ref. [ 2], Einstein’s equations without im-
posing axisymmetry were given in part; the full expres-
sions for the hypersurface and evolution equations in vac-
uum (and with respect to a particular parameterization
of Bondi-Sachs coordinates) were given in [
35]. The hy-
persurface and evolution equations with matter sources
(and in a covariant notation with respect to the 2-sphere
cross sections) were written later in [
36]. We will not give
these (somewhat lengthy) expressions here; however, we
will brieﬂy discuss the structure of Einstein’s equations
as elaborated in these references.
Of the ten components of Einstein’s equations, four
take the form of “hypersurface” equations, which do
not involve u derivatives, and which constrain diﬀer-
ent metric functions on hypersurfaces of constant u.
Two other components are evolution-type equations for
the transverse-traceless parts of the metric. The ﬁnal
four components are sometimes called the “conservation”
equations, though one component is trivially satisﬁed.
The remaining three components have the property that
if they are satisﬁed at a ﬁxed value of r on an outgo-
ing null cone in a Bondi coordinate chart, then they are
satisﬁed for all such values of r. This follows from the
contracted Bianchi identities (which are equivalent to lo-
cal stress-energy conservation for spacetimes with matter
sources).
We next brieﬂy review the procedure involved in the
derivation of the components of Einstein’s equations that
we will need in the discussion below. We start from the
Bondi-Sachs metric, which we write as
ds2 = −Ue 2βdu2 − 2e2βdudr
+r2γAB(dθA −U Adu)(dθB −U Bdu). (2.1)
We then assume that the functions U , β, U A and γAB
can be expanded in a series in 1 /r with the asymptotic
fall-oﬀ conditions given in [
1]. When the spacetime con-
tains matter sources, it is also necessary to assume fall-oﬀ
conditions on the stress-energy tensor Tab. We use those
4
discussed in [ 16], which are based on the stress-energy
tensor of a radiating scalar ﬁeld in ﬂat spacetime:
Tuu =r−2 ˆTuu(u,θ A) +O(r−3), (2.2a)
TuA =r−2 ˆTuA(u,θ B) +O(r−3), (2.2b)
TrA =r−3 ˆTrA(u,θ B) +O(r−4), (2.2c)
Trr =r−4 ˆTrr(u,θ A) +O(r−5), (2.2d)
(TAB)TF =r−2 ˆTAB(u,θ C ) +O(r−3). (2.2e)
The superscript “TF” means to take the trace-free part of
the expression on the left-hand side of the equation with
respect to the metric on the 2-sphere, hAB. Note that lo-
cal stress-energy conservation requires that the functions
ˆTrr and ˆTrA be related by
ˆTrA(u,θ B) = ˇTrA(θB) − 1
2DATrr(u,θ B) (2.3)
(see, e.g., [ 16]). The derivative operator DA is the Levi-
Civita connection compatible with the metric hAB.
The hypersurface-type components of Einstein’s equa-
tions can then be applied to determine the precise form
of the expansion of the functions U , β, U A and γAB in
a series in 1 /r. At the accuracy in 1 /r needed for the
discussion of Einstein’s equations below, these functions
are given by
γAB =hAB
(
1 + 1
4r2CCDCCD + 1
2r3 DCDCCD
)
+ 1
rCAB + 1
r2 DAB + 1
r3 EAB +O(r−4), (2.4a)
U A = − 1
2r2DBCAB + 1
r3
[
− 2
3N A + 1
16DA(CBCCBC )
+ 1
2CABDCCBC
]
+O(r−4), (2.4b)
U = 1 − 2m
r +O(r−2), (2.4c)
β = − 1
r2
(
π ˆTrr + 1
32CABCAB
)
+O(r−3). (2.4d)
In the expressions above, all the scalars and tensors
on the right-hand side are functions of the coordinates
(u,θ A), which have been omitted to make the notation
more compact; also all capital Latin indices are raised
and lowered with the metric hAB and its inverse. The
tensorsCAB, DAB, and EAB in the expansion of γAB are
symmetric and trace free. This, as well as the form of
the term proportional to hAB, is required to satisfy the
determinant condition of Bondi gauge: ∂r det(γAB) = 0.
Two of the hypersurface-type components of Einstein’s
equations also require that DBDBA = −8π ˇTrA. The
two additional functions m(u,θ A) and NA(u,θ B) are of-
ten called the Bondi mass and angular-momentum as-
pects, respectively. We use a convention for the angular-
momentum aspect like that used by Sachs [
2], in which it
is proportional to the 1 /r4 parts of certain components
of the Riemann tensor.
The three nontrivial conservation components of Ein-
stein’s equations require that the Bondi mass and
angular-momentum aspects satisfy the following equa-
tions:
˙m = − 4π ˆTuu − 1
8NABN AB + 1
4DADBN AB, (2.5a)
˙NA = − 8π ˆTuA +πDA∂u ˆTrr +DAm
+ 1
4DBDADCCBC − 1
4DBDBDCCCA
+ 1
4DB(N BCCCA ) + 1
2DBN BCCCA. (2.5b)
The dot over the variables on the left-hand side is a
short-hand notation for ∂u. We deﬁne the news tensor
as NAB = ∂uCAB (twice that deﬁned in [
1]). The news
tensor is a quantity that arises from solving the evolu-
tion equations for the traverse-traceless components of
Einstein’s equations at leading order in 1 /r. The news
tensor is unconstrained, but it can be shown that it van-
ishes when the spacetime is not radiating GWs [
37].
Expanding the evolution-type components of Ein-
stein’s equations at higher order in 1 /r, leads ﬁrst to
the equation ˙DAB = 0, which is consistent with the
hypersurface-type equations DBDBA = −8π ˇTrA. When
the spacetime is vacuum, it follows that DAB = 0. The
tensor EAB satisﬁes a nontrivial evolution equation:
˙EAB = − 4π ˆTAB − 2π(∂u ˆTrr)CAB − 1
2 DAB + 1
2mCAB
+π
(
DADB − 1
2hABD2
)
ˆTrr + 1
3D(ANB)
− 1
6hAB(DCN C) + 1
4CAB(NCDCCD )
− 1
8ǫACCCB (ǫDEDEDCCCD ). (2.6)
A closely related equation in axisymmetry and in vac-
uum appears in the paper [
1]. Restricting Eq. ( 2.6) to
vacuum, it is equivalent to an equation derived by van
der Burg [
35] after taking into account diﬀerences in no-
tation and convention used (Sachs [ 2] also derives a re-
lated equation, but does not present all the nonlinear
terms). The linearized limit of Eq. (
2.6) also agrees with
the nonvacuum expression given in, e.g., [ 38]. Because
the tensor EAB is closely related to the Newman-Penrose
scalar ψ0 [39] (discussed in [ 2]), it is also closely related
to evolution equations for this scalar (see, for example,
the review [
40]).
B. Stationary and nonradiative regions and
transitions between these regions
For computing memory eﬀects, we specialize to asymp-
totically ﬂat spacetimes that begin in a stationary or a
nonradiative (NAB = 0) state, radiate GWs and mass-
less ﬁelds, and then settle into a diﬀerent nonradiative
5
or stationary state. We will often make the further as-
sumptions that the initial stationary or nonradiative re-
gion is in vacuum ( Tab = 0), the radiative region of the
spacetime is not in vacuum [and the stress-energy tensor
satisﬁes the conditions in Eq. (
2.2)], and the ﬁnal station-
ary or nonradiative region also is in vacuum. Einstein’s
equations in (
2.5) and ( 2.6) constrain the form of the
Bondi-metric functions m,NA, and EAB in stationary or
nonradiative regions, which restricts the space of solu-
tions to Einstein’s equations therein. However, it does
not imply that a given set of astrophysical sources will
necessarily realize the full space of solutions consistent
with the vacuum and stationary or nonradiative condi-
tions.
This type of issue (as it relates to the GW mem-
ory eﬀect) was discussed by Frauendiener [
41]. From
the perspective of Einstein’s equations, the news ten-
sor can be an arbitrary function NAB(u,θ C ), and in a
nonradiative-to-nonradiative transition, the memory can
have any amplitude and angular dependence (this should
hold for the changes in m, NA, and EAB, too). How-
ever, from the perspective of solving a speciﬁc initial-
value problem for a certain astrophysical source, the
news tensor cannot be speciﬁed freely; rather, it follows
from the dynamics of the source. The Bondi news ten-
sor can be determined through some sort of matching
procedure analytically (e.g., through post-Newtonian-
expanded, multipolar-post-Minkowski calculations [
42])
or numerically (e.g., through Cauchy-characteristic ex-
traction [
43]). For the speciﬁc systems treated in this
paper (inspiraling compact binaries, and particularly
binary-black-hole mergers), the allowed values of the
memory, and the changes in m, NA, and EAB are more
restricted than those allowed by the general solutions of
Einstein’s equations in a stationary or nonradiative re-
gion.
5 In this paper, we will focus on this latter per-
spective, because we are ultimately interested in GW
memory eﬀects arising from the inspiral and merger of
nonspinning compact binaries. Nevertheless, we will ﬁrst
describe the general solutions of Einstein’s equations in
nonradiative and stationary regions, to make clear the
5 This issue can be recast in terms of how the conservation-typ e
components of Einstein’s equations are treated. These equa tions
are automatically satisﬁed for all r on an outgoing null cone in a
Bondi coordinate patch, so long as they are satisﬁed on some 2 -
sphere of ﬁxed r. One choice for this 2-sphere is at inﬁnite radius
(i.e., at future null inﬁnity). At this boundary of an asympt ot-
ically ﬂat spacetime, it is possible to allow for any value of the
news tensor NAB , because quantities at null inﬁnity can be de-
ﬁned without reference to the interior of the spacetime. Fro m
this perspective, however, it is not clear if these values of the
Bondi news tensor correspond to any astrophysical solution of
Einstein’s equations in the interior of the spacetime. The o ther
viewpoint, which ﬁts more with the aims of this paper, is to al low
the Bondi functions to satisfy the conservation-type compo nents
of Einstein’s equations at ﬁnite r and to determine their evolu-
tion by matching to a speciﬁc initial-value (Cauchy) soluti on for
a given system (as described, e.g., in [ 44]).
types of restrictions we are making in specializing to par-
ticular sources.
In a nonradiative and vacuum region, the ﬁrst line of
Eq. (
2.5) requires that the Bondi mass aspect is inde-
pendent of u, so that it is just a function of angular
coordinates, m(θA). From the other lines of Eq. ( 2.5),
it then follows that NA can have a piece that depends
linearly on u. The electric-parity part of NA depends
onDAm, while the magnetic-parity part depends on the
magnetic-parity part of CAB. Although the magnetic-
parity part vanishes in stationary regions (see [ 35, 45]),
it need not vanish in nonradiative regions. NA can also
have a part that is independent of u (with both electric
and magnetic parities). Finally, from Eq. ( 2.6), it then
implies that EAB can have terms proportional to u2, u,
and independent of u with both electric and magnetic
parities, in a nonradiative, vacuum region. Summarizing
these results by explicitly solving Eqs. (
2.5) and ( 2.6) in
such a region, we ﬁnd that
m =m(θA), (2.7a)
NA =uDAm + u
4 (DBDADCCBC −D2DBCAB)
+N (0)
A (θB), (2.7b)
EAB =u2
24 [4DADBm − 2D2mhAB +DBDADCCBC
−D2DBCAB] + u
2mCAB + u
6 (2D(AN (0)
B)
−DCN (0)
C hAB) − u
8ǫACCCB (ǫDEDEDCCCD )
+ E (0)
AB(θC ). (2.7c)
Recall that while Eq. ( 2.7) is the most general solution
for m, NA, and EAB consistent with a nonradiative and
vacuum region of future null inﬁnity, it is not clear if the
nonradiative regions of a speciﬁc astrophysical system,
such as a merging compact binary, will realize this level
of generality.
Stationary vacuum regions, for example, have frames
in which the Bondi metric functions are independent of
u [
35, 45]. Applying this condition to Eq. ( 2.7), we ﬁnd
thatm is a constant, the magnetic-parity part of CAB is
zero, and N (0)
A is composed of both l = 1 vector spherical
harmonics and l> 1 harmonics that satisfy 2 D(AN (0)
B) −
(DCN (0)
C )hAB = −3mCAB. These frames can then be
transformed to the “canonical” frame described in [ 16],
in which m is constant, CAB = 0, and N (0)
A is composed
of l = 1 magnetic-parity vector harmonics.
Because our primary focus in this paper is on merging
compact binaries composed of black holes, we will need
to know the properties of the nonradiative regions for
these binaries at early and late times in their evolution.
At early times, the binaries can be approximated well
by PN theory. One assumption in this approximation is
that there is a (ﬁnite) time before which the system was
stationary in the past (see, e.g., [
42]). This could corre-
spond to a time early in the evolution of the binary, when
6
the binary’s components are suﬃciently widely separated
and slowly moving that the system can be treated as
stationary. The outcome of a binary-black-hole merger
is a stationary black hole. For studying binary-black-
hole mergers, therefore, it should be suﬃcient to consider
stationary-to-stationary transitions. It is also important
to brieﬂy describe the types of restrictions assuming a
stationary-to-stationary transition will cause, so as to
better understand the generality of our results.
For simplicity, in most of the subsequent calculations
and discussion, we will assume that the initial stationary
frame is the canonical frame of the system. At late times,
the stationary frame will generally not be the canonical
frame, but one that diﬀers from the canonical frame by a
BMS transformation (which can be decomposed into a ro-
tation, followed by a boost, and then a supertranslation).
From these properties of the initial and ﬁnal frames, we
anticipate that there will be two diﬀerent types of re-
strictions from assuming a stationary-to-stationary tran-
sition.
The ﬁrst is that the magnetic-parity part of the shear
will vanish in both stationary regions (although, in gen-
eral m will not be constant and NA will not consist
of just l = 1 magnetic-parity vector harmonics in the
ﬁnal stationary region). This does not seem to be a
very strong restriction, because M¨ adler and Winicour [
38]
have shown that there is no magnetic-parity memory
eﬀect in the absence of incoming radiation or time-
dependent, anisotropic, magnetic-parity material stresses
near null inﬁnity (which compact binaries are generally
not expected to have, for example). Several common
classes of stress-energy tensors also do not give rise to
magnetic-parity memory [
38]. The second type of re-
striction relates to the ordinary part of the GW memory
(using the terminology of [
27]). Assuming a stationary-
to-stationary transition makes the ordinary part of the
GW memory a function of just the change in the 4-
momentum radiated by the spacetime. It, therefore,
would exclude certain physically relevant systems, like
the gravitational scattering of astrophysical objects con-
sidered in [
20]. Note, however, that the assumption of a
stationary-to-stationary transition does not have a signif-
icant eﬀect on the null part of the GW memory (neither
the linear nor the nonlinear parts).
Finally, because the set of stationary-to-stationary
transitions is contained within the larger set of
nonradiative-to-nonradiative transitions, imposing the
former assumption will generally restrict the types of pos-
sible memory eﬀects. Because stationary-to-stationary
transitions contain an interesting set of physical systems
(compact-binary mergers), it has suﬃcient generality to
allow for some nontrivial memory eﬀects (even if they are
not the most general eﬀects possible). Having elaborated
our assumptions and their consequences, we next discuss
BMS symmetries and their conjugate charges and ﬂuxes.
C. Symmetries, charges, and ﬂuxes
The vector ﬁelds at future null inﬁnity that deﬁne the
(extended) BMS algebra, ⃗ζ, are parameterized by a scalar
function α(θA) and a vector on the 2-sphere Y A(θB) as
follows:
⃗ζ = [α(θA) +uDAY A(θB)/2]⃗∂u +Y A(θB)⃗∂A. (2.8)
The quantity α(θA) is a smooth function that corre-
sponds to a supertranslation, and Y A(θB) are l = 1 vec-
tor spherical harmonics, for the standard BMS group.
For the extended BMS algebra [
17],Y A are elements of a
Virasoro algebra, or for the generalized BMS group [ 14],
they are smooth vector ﬁelds on the 2-sphere. The stan-
dard and extended BMS symmetries at null inﬁnity can
be deﬁned at ﬁnite r in Bondi coordinates by requiring
that the spacetime metric continues to satisfy the Bondi
gauge conditions and the same scaling with r under pull-
back along the symmetry vector ﬁelds. The vector ﬁelds
in (
2.8) have a series expansion in 1 /r in the interior of
the spacetime, and the Bondi metric functions ( CAB,m,
and NA) transform nontrivially under these (extended)
BMS symmetries. The formulas for the BMS vector ﬁelds
and the transformations of the Bondi functions are given,
for example, in [
46].
For most of the computations in this paper, we are
interested in how the Bondi functions transform under
supertranslations in vacuum and in stationary or non-
radiative regions of the types described in the previous
subsection. Specializing the results in [
16], for example,
we ﬁnd that m is invariant under supertranslations and
δCAB =(−2DADB +hABD2)α ≡ −2C(α)
AB (2.9a)
δNA =αDAm + 3mDAα + 1
4CABDBD2α
− 3
4DBα(DBDCCCA −DADCCBC )
+ 3
8DA(CBCC(α)
BC ) + 1
2C(α)
ABDCCBC (2.9b)
(the ﬁrst line can be found from the results in [ 2] or [ 26]).
In the equation above, we have introduced the notation
C(α)
AB to denote the electric-parity part of the shear gen-
erated by a scalar “potential” α(θA).
The (super) angular momentum in a vacuum, non-
radiative region of null inﬁnity, on a cut C of constant
u =u0, is given by
Q[⃗ζY ; C] = 1
128π
∫
d2ΩY A[16(NA −u0DAm)
−DA(CBCCBC ) − 4CABDCCBC ], (2.10)
where by⃗ζY , we mean a BMS vector ﬁeld with α = 0, and
which is thus parameterized by the vector on a 2-sphere,
Y A. The prescription to compute this charge correspond-
ing to a vector ﬁeld Y A(θB) is outlined in [
16], which is
based on the procedure in [ 11] (and which gives equiv-
alent results to those deﬁned via a diﬀerent procedure
7
in [ 17], in the nonradiative and vacuum regions treated
here).
The integral of the ﬂux of (super) angular momentum
between two cuts C1 and C2 in vacuum, nonradiative re-
gions given by u =u1 and u =u2, respectively, is
∆ ˜Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] = − 1
64π
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2Ω[uDA(2DBDCN BC
−NBCN BC − 32π ˆTuu) +DA(CBCN BC )
+ 2N BCDACBC − 4DB(N BCCAC )
+ 64π ˆTuA]Y A. (2.11)
It was shown in [ 16] that the changes in the charges be-
tween the two cuts C1 and C2 do not equal the integral of
the ﬂux in Eq. ( 2.11) for the meromorphic super-rotation
vector ﬁelds Y A (i.e., when Y A is not one of the six gen-
erators of the Lorentz group). To restore equality for
these extended BMS symmetries, an additional term of
the form
∆ F [⃗ζY ; C2, C1] ≡ 1
32π
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2ΩY AǫABǫCD
×DBDDDECCE. (2.12)
must be added. The change in the charges is then given
by
Q[⃗ζY ; C2] −Q[⃗ζY ; C1] = ∆ ˜Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] − ∆ F [⃗ζY ; C2, C1].
(2.13)
We reiterate that the term ∆ F [⃗ζY ; C2, C1] vanishes for
the standard BMS group; it is only needed for the addi-
tional elements of the extended BMS algebra. The term
∆ F [⃗ζY ; C2, C1] is also closely related to the spin memory
eﬀect of [
29], as discussed in [ 16].
It will be convenient to deﬁne a quantity that is equal
to the change in the charges:
∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] ≡Q[⃗ζY ; C2] −Q[⃗ζY ; C1] (2.14)
After some algebra (described in [ 16]), it was shown that
the change in the charges can be written as
∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] = − 1
64π
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2Ω[uDA(2DBDCN BC
−NBCN BC − 32π ˆTuu) +CBCDBNAC
−N BCDBCAC + 3(NABDCCBC
−CABDCCBC ) + 64π ˆTuA + 16π∂u ˆTrA
+ 2ǫABǫCDDBDDDECCE ]Y A. (2.15)
D. Transformation properties of (super) angular
momentum under supertranslations
We now point out a few features of the (super) angu-
lar momentum charges and ﬂuxes that we have not seen
discussed explicitly elsewhere, but which may be related
to two other aspects of the charges and ﬂuxes that have
been previously noted. The ﬁrst is that nonlinear terms
involving the shear in the super angular momentum can
make it behave nontrivially: for example, it can be non-
vanishing in spacetimes that are ﬂat aside from a defect
at the origin [
47]. The second is the observation that the
ﬂux of angular momentum will depend upon nonradia-
tive (or “Coulombic”) parts of the Bondi metric functions
and stress-energy tensor [
48].
To illustrate the transformation properties of the (su-
per) angular momentum, we will examine the same
stationary-to-stationary transition from the perspective
of two diﬀerent Bondi frames. For the ﬁrst frame, we use
the canonical frame associated with the initial station-
ary region. Constructing this frame ﬁxes all the degrees
of freedom in the BMS group except for a global SO(3)
rotation and a time translation (a BMS transformation
with⃗ζ =u0⃗∂u, for a constant, u0). We denote by C1 a cut
corresponding to a retarded time u =u1 in the initial sta-
tionary region and by C2 a cut of constant u =u2 in the
latter stationary region. For the second Bondi frame, we
will consider one that is supertranslated from the canon-
ical Bondi frame of the initial stationary region by an
amount α. Because u′ = u +α, we will denote the cuts
by C′
1 and C′
2, which correspond to 2-sphere cross sections
of constantu′ =u′
1 andu′ =u′
2, respectively. Finally, we
also assume that the spacetime has GW memory, which
is determined by a potential ∆Φ( θA) and which is given
by
∆ CAB =CAB(u2) −CAB(u1)
= 1
2 (2DADB −hABD2)∆Φ . (2.16)
The memory is invariant under supertranslations (i.e.,
is equivalent to the related quantity measured at the
times u′
2 and u′
1). We will treat the supertranslation,
α, as small, and we will compute the transformation of
the charges to linear order in α. We will not linearize
with respect to the potential ∆Φ that determines the
GW memory.
We are particularly interested in comparing the
changes in the charges between the cuts C1 and C2
with those between the cuts C′
1 and C′
2. Performing
such a comparison is somewhat subtle, because the
(extended) BMS vector ﬁelds corresponding to (super)
Lorentz transformations on cuts of constant u andu′ are
diﬀerent. Namely, the quantity
⃗ζY = 1
2uDAY A⃗∂u +Y A⃗∂A (2.17)
and the equivalent vector ﬁelds adapted to the cuts of
constantu′ diﬀer by a supertranslation (e.g., [
3] and [17]).
The charges associated with these two vector ﬁelds will
therefore include diﬀerent amounts of supermomentum.
While this is to be expected, the diﬀerence in the charges
arising from the dependence of the charges on the cut will
mix with the diﬀerence that comes from the dependence
8
of the charges on the generators adapted to those cuts.
Instead, we will compute the change in the charges be-
tween the cuts of constant u′ with the generators adapted
to cuts of constant u. The vector ﬁeld ⃗ζY expressed in
terms of the primed coordinates is given by
⃗ζY =
[ 1
2 (u′ −α)(DAY A) +Y ADAα
]
⃗∂u′ +Y A⃗∂A
(2.18)
(see, e.g., [ 49]).
We will now show that in stationary vacuum re-
gions, the (super) angular momentum transforms non-
trivially under supertranslations (unlike the supermo-
mentum, which is supertranslation invariant in this con-
text). The reason for this is as follows. Although we use
the same BMS vector ﬁeld, ⃗ζY , to compute the charges in
the cuts deﬁned by u andu′, because the cuts of constant
u′ are supertranslated from the cuts of constant u, the
values of the Bondi metric functions CAB and NA diﬀer
between the two sets of cuts (even in the vacuum and
stationary regions). In addition, the split of the vector
ﬁeld ⃗ζY into parts tangent and orthogonal to cuts of u
andu′ will diﬀer, which will also inﬂuence the value of the
charges. Finally, because the (super) angular momentum
charge depends on CAB and its derivatives quadratically,
it follows from Eqs. (
2.9) and ( 2.10) that the (super) an-
gular momentum charges that are supertranslated from
a stationary region in which CAB = 0 diﬀer from the
charges that are supertranslated from a frame with a
nonzero CAB. While the physical reason for this is not
immediately obvious, we speculate that these nonlinear
terms capture a diﬀerence in the “origin” about which
the (super) angular momentum is computed in these two
cases.
Let us explicitly compute how this change in the
charges produced by a supertranslation (which we will
denote by δQ[⃗ζY ; C′, C]) will aﬀect the change in the (su-
per) angular momentum between the two stationary re-
gions (i.e., ∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] versus ∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C′
1]). In the
stationary region including u1 and u′
1, because we are
working to linear order in the supertranslation α from
the canonical frame, then the change is similar to a re-
sult for the (super) angular momentum charges in [
16].
To linear order in α, we ﬁnd that
δQ[⃗ζY ; C′
1, C1] = 1
8π
∫
d2Ω(5Y ADAα −αDAY A)m1,
(2.19)
where we have used the notation m1 =m(u1) = m(u′
1).
Next, let us compute δQ[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C2]. The expression
for this quantity is somewhat lengthier, because we are
allowing CAB to be nonzero at late times (and equal to
the GW memory, ∆ CAB, in the cut u = u2). Using
Eqs. (
2.9) and ( 2.10), we ﬁnd that to linear order in α
δQ[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C2] = 1
8π
∫
d2Ω(5Y ADAα −αDAY A)m2
+ 1
64π
∫
d2ΩY A[2∆ CABDBD2α−
6DBα(DBDC ∆ CCA −DADC∆ CBC )
+ 5DA(∆ CBCC(α)
BC ) + 8C(α)
ABDC ∆ CBC
+ 4∆ CABDCCBC
(α) . (2.20)
Given the relationship in Eq. ( 2.14), then by construc-
tion, the changes in the charges between the cuts C1 and
C2 and the cuts C′
1 and C′
2 are related by
∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C′
1] =∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] +δQ[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C2]
−δQ[⃗ζY ; C′
1, C1]. (2.21)
Using Eqs. ( 2.19) and ( 2.20), we can compute a dif-
ference in the changes of the charges, ∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C′
1] −
∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1], which we ﬁnd is
∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C′
2, C′
1] − ∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] =
1
8π
∫
d2Ω(5Y ADAα −αDAY A)∆ m + 1
64π
∫
d2ΩY A×
[2∆ CABDBD2α − 6DBα(DBDC∆ CCA −DADC ∆ CBC )
+ 5DA(∆ CBCC(α)
BC ) + 8C(α)
ABDC ∆ CBC
+ 4∆ CABDCCBC
(α) ]. (2.22)
We deﬁned ∆ m =m2 −m1 in the expression above. This
result is interesting, because the change in the charges
is related to the integral of the ﬂux (plus the additional
term ∆ F [⃗ζY ; C′
2, C′
1]). Thus, while it was not very surpris-
ing that the (super) angular momentum charges trans-
form under supertranslations, it is more surprising that
this change arising from a BMS transformation does not
cancel between early and late times in a stationary-to-
stationary transition (i.e., the ﬂux transforms nontriv-
ially under supertranslations).
From Eq. (
2.22), it is clear that this lack of cancella-
tion occurs when the system radiates supermomentum or
when there is GW memory. Thus, the result in Eq. (
2.22)
is a combined eﬀect of the GW memory, changes in the
supermomentum, and the transformation properties of
the (super) angular momentum under supertranslations.
This is an interesting feature of the change in the (super)
angular momentum that will be relevant when we discuss
the ﬂux of the CM angular momentum in the next sub-
sections. We do not anticipate that it will play an impor-
tant role for the CM memory eﬀect: in Sec.
III, we show
that the CM memory is invariant under inﬁnitesimal su-
pertranslations α. It may also be possible to modify this
transformation property of the change in the charges by
an appropriate redeﬁnition of the charges. Investigating
this issue, however, goes beyond the scope of this work.
9
E. Center-of-mass part of (super) angular
momentum and its ﬂux
In this part, we focus on a few issues that apply specif-
ically to the (super-) CM part of the angular momentum.
CM angular momentum is the conserved quantity conju-
gate to Lorentz boost symmetries. In special relativity,
it is usually denoted by K i, and it is closely related to
the mass-weighted CM position, Gi. When there are no
external forces, these two quantities satisfy the relation-
ships
K i =Gi −tP i, dGi
dt =P i, dK i
dt = 0 (2.23)
(see, e.g., [ 50]). Thus, we see that K i is the conserved
quantity in this context, and that it represents the mass
times the CM position in the center-of-momentum frame.
It is also a trivial quantity in this context, because by
translating the origin of coordinates around which the
CM is computed, the CM part of the angular momentum
can be set to zero.
In stationary regions of asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes,
the (super-) CM angular momentum [deﬁned by the
integral of the electric-parity part of the integrand in
Eq. (
2.10) against a vector ﬁeld Y A] is again trivial; by
performing the BMS transformations needed to reach the
canonical frame, we can make the (super-) CM angular
momentum vanish (see [
16]). We argue below that the
change in the (super-) CM angular momentum can be
nontrivial in a stationary-to-stationary transition from
the canonical frame of the ﬁrst stationary region (in the
sense that the CM angular momentum contains addi-
tional information not contained in the changes of other
BMS charges or in the GW memory or spin memory ef-
fects, in this context). We provide further evidence for
this by computing the ﬂux of CM angular momentum in
the PN approximation in Sec.
IV. It could be of interest
to compare this result to a related calculation of the ﬂux
of CM angular momentum in numerical relativity simula-
tions in [
51], though we will not attempt to do this in this
paper. Instead, we will ﬁrst point out a few more general
features about the CM angular momentum and its ﬂux,
before we investigate these quantities for compact-binary
sources in Sec.
IV.
Because the CM angular momentum, K i, is the mass
times the CM position in the rest frame of the system (in
the context of special relativity, with no external forces),
it is worth brieﬂy discussing the physical interpretation
of this quantity when the CM of the system is changing
because of radiated linear momentum. To do so, let us
recast Eq. (
2.15) for the change in the charges in terms
of the instantaneous ﬂux on a cut of constant u:
˙K⃗ζY
= − 1
64π
∫
d2ΩY A[uDA(2DBDCN BC −NBCN BC
− 32π ˆTuu) +CBCDBNAC −N BCDBCAC
+ 3(NABDCCBC −CABDCCBC )
+ 64π ˆTuA + 16π∂u ˆTrA]. (2.24)
Note that we have denoted this ﬂux by ˙K⃗ζY
to parallel
the notation commonly used for the CM angular mo-
mentum in special relativity. Integrating the ﬁrst three
terms in Eq. (
2.24) by parts, we ﬁnd that these terms
have exactly the same form as the ﬂux of supermomen-
tum; however, instead of a scalar α(θA) appearing in the
charge integral, it is uDAY A(θB)/2. This is to be ex-
pected given that the BMS vector ﬁeld (
2.8) contains a
sum of both α anduDAY A/2 in the ⃗∂u direction. The re-
maining terms in the integrand [which are related to the
part ⃗Y =Y A⃗∂A of the vector ﬁeld ⃗ζY in Eq. (
2.17)] have
a similar form to the ﬂux of the (super) spin; however,
they are now the electric-parity part of the integrand,
rather than the magnetic-parity part. Because it is the
electric-parity part, the term related to the spin memory
in Eq. (
2.12) does not contribute. To emphasize the con-
tributions from the two types of terms, we will write the
instantaneous ﬂux as the sum of two terms as follows:
˙K⃗ζY
= ˙k⃗Y + u
2
˙P(DAY A). (2.25)
The second term involving ˙P(DAY A) has the same form
as the supermomentum ﬂux (for a scalar function DAY A
rather than α), and the quantity ˙k⃗Y contains the remain-
ing terms, which are related to the part of ⃗ζY not pro-
portional to ⃗∂u.
Consider now the change in the (super) CM angu-
lar momentum in a stationary-to-stationary transition.
Given the splitting in Eq. (
2.25), this change can be writ-
ten as
∆ K⃗ζY
(u2,u 1) = ∆ k⃗Y +
∫ u2
u1
duu
2
˙P(DAY A). (2.26)
Note that this is a specialization of and rewriting of
Eq. (
2.15); we have used the notation ∆ K⃗ζY
(u2,u 1)
rather than ∆ Q[⃗ζY ; C2, C1] to emphasize that it applies
speciﬁcally to the change of the CM angular momentum.
We also write the vector ﬁeld as a subscript and use u2
andu1 rather than C2 and C1 to make the notation more
compact (which will be particularly helpful for when we
derive the multipolar expansion of the change in the CM
angular momentum, which we do in the next subsection).
Integrating the second term in Eq. (
2.26) by parts, the
change has the form
∆ K⃗ζY
(u2,u 1) =∆ k⃗Y + 1
2 [uP(DAY A)]
⏐
⏐u2
u1
− 1
2
∫ u2
u1
duP(DAY A). (2.27)
10
Thus, we can now better understand the physical inter-
pretation of the change in the (super-) CM part of the
angular momentum in a stationary-to-stationary tran-
sition. The ﬁrst term ∆ k⃗Y represents a change in the
(super-) CM angular momentum, which is similar to the
integral of the ﬂux of the intrinsic angular momentum
(but involves the electric-parity part of the integrand,
rather than the magnetic-parity part). The last term in
Eq. (
2.27) represents the change in the CM part of the
angular momentum that arises from integrating the time
dependence of a term like the supermomentum associ-
ated with the quantity DAY A. This term would typically
grow linearly with u when there is a net change in the
supermomentum; however, the middle term in Eq. (
2.27)
also grows linearly with u, and will cancel this growth
from the last term. The quantity ∆ K⃗ζY
(u1,u 2), there-
fore, is ﬁnite for spacetimes that radiate supermomen-
tum over ﬁnite retarded-time intervals u ∈ [u1,u 2], and
it contains information about the time dependence of the
supermomentum beyond what is given by the net change
in the supermomentum.
6 Thus, although the (super) CM
part of the angular momentum can be made to vanish in a
stationary region, its change in a stationary-to-stationary
transition does not necessarily vanish. In addition, it con-
tains additional information that is not captured in the
net changes in the supermomenta or in the other BMS
charges.
There is a interesting feature speciﬁc to the ﬂux of
(super-) CM angular momentum that we now point out.
Suppose we specialize Eq. (
2.22) to the case in which
α = u0 is a constant shift in retarded time. All terms
except the ﬁrst vanish, and we ﬁnd that
∆ K⃗ζY
(u′
2,u ′
1) − ∆ K⃗ζY
(u2,u 1) = −u0
2 ∆ P(DAY A).
(2.28)
Thus, when there is a net change in the linear momen-
tum or the supermomentum, the change in the (super)
CM angular momentum is not invariant under shifts in
the cuts by constant values of u0. This transformation
property of the CM angular momentum could be useful
for deﬁning a speciﬁc BMS frame in an asymptotically
ﬂat spacetime. As we noted in the previous subsection,
the canonical frame associated with the initial station-
ary region ﬁxes all the BMS transformations except for
a time translation ⃗ζ = u0⃗∂u and a global SO(3) rota-
tion. In these stationary regions, the charges are invari-
ant under time translations; thus, they cannot be used
6 If we take the limits u1 → −∞ and u2 → +∞ , then we must
make additional assumptions about the rate at which the su-
permomentum approaches a constant in the limits u → ±∞ to
ensure that the change in CM angular momentum is ﬁnite. For
example, if we assume the leading-order time dependence goe s
as P(DAY A) ∼ P0(1 + |u/u0|−n) as u → ±∞ (u0 is a reference
time), then it is clear that we would need to require n > 1. A
detailed study of these types of asymptotics is beyond the sc ope
of this work, and it will not be necessary for spacetimes that
radiate for a ﬁnite interval of retarded time, u ∈ [u1, u2].
to determine a “preferred” retarded time in a station-
ary region. When there is a ﬂux of 4-momentum (i.e.,
when ∆ P(DAY A) ⁄= 0), its time dependence allows for a
preferred reference time (i.e., an “origin” of the time co-
ordinate) to be picked out. One natural choice comes
from requiring that the magnitude of the change in the
CM angular momentum be minimized. This is satisﬁed
by a value of u0 given by
u0 =
2∆ K⃗ζY
∆ P(DAY A)
∆ P 2
(DAY A)
. (2.29)
This value of u0 can be computed from changes in the
BMS charges at inﬁnity, and it is a geometrically moti-
vated method of determining a reference time for space-
times that radiate 4-momentum. A possible application
of this property of the CM angular momentum is deﬁning
a reference time for comparing gravitational waveforms
from numerical relativity simulations of compact binaries
that radiate linear momentum. While we will not inves-
tigate this point in greater detail in this paper, we will
make use of this reference time for computing the change
in the CM angular momentum in Sec.
IV.
F. Multipole expansion of the ﬂux of CM angular
momentum carried by GWs
To compute an expression for the ﬂux of the CM an-
gular momentum carried by GWs in terms of a set of
multipole moments of the GW strain, we will closely fol-
low the methods used to calculate the GW memory and
spin memory eﬀects given in [
19]. We will expand CAB
in terms of electric- and magnetic-parity tensor spherical
harmonics as
CAB =
∑
l,m
(UlmT (e),lm
AB +VlmT (b),lm
AB ), (2.30)
where the conventions we use for the second-rank ten-
sor spherical harmonics are given in an appendix of [
19].
Because the tensor CAB is real, and because the tensor
spherical harmonics satisfy the relationships
T (e),l−m
AB = (−1)m ¯T (e),lm
AB , T (b),l−m
AB = (−1)m ¯T (b),lm
AB
(2.31)
(where the overline denotes complex conjugation), the
coeﬃcients of this expansion in spherical harmonics obey
the related properties
Ul−m = (−1)m ¯Ulm, V l−m = (−1)m ¯Vlm. (2.32)
These tensor spherical harmonics are also related to spin-
weighted spherical harmonics, a complex vector
⃗ m= 1
√
2 (⃗∂θ +i cscθ⃗∂φ), (2.33)
and its complex conjugate. The GW ﬂux in Eq. ( 2.24)
(which is a product of the shear, the news tensor, and the
11
derivatives of both quantities) can be expressed as a prod-
uct of vector and second- and third-rank tensor spherical
harmonics (see [
19] for more detail). For simplicity, we
will assume that the stress-energy tensor of the matter
ﬁelds vanishes, although this could be included trivially,
because the ﬂux is linear in the material stress-energy
tensor.
To compute thel = 1 moments of the ﬂux, we will inte-
grate minus
7 the ﬂux in Eq. ( 2.24) against vector ﬁelds of
the formYA =DA ¯Y1,m, whereYl,m(θ,φ ) are scalar spher-
ical harmonics with the Condon-Shortley phase conven-
tion. It is then possible to express the multipole moments
of the ﬂux in terms of integrals of products of three spin-
weighted spherical harmonics (with the conventions for
the harmonics given in [
19]). Before evaluating these in-
tegrals, it will again be useful to perform integration by
parts on the set of terms in Eq. (
2.24) that are the di-
vergence of a scalar quantity. Once this is done, the ﬂux
splits naturally into two types of terms
dK (GW)
1,m
du = dk(GW)
1,m
du −udP (GW)
1,m
du , (2.34)
as in Eq. ( 2.25). Note that the apparent factor of −2 dif-
ference between the second terms on the right-hand sides
of Eqs. (
2.25) and ( 2.34) comes from a diﬀerence in con-
vention for the supermomentum associated with a scalar
function DAY A and the convention commonly used for
the l = 1 moments of the ﬂux of linear momentum. The
multipolar expansion of the ﬁrst term on the right-hand
side of Eq. (
2.34) has not been computed before (as far as
we are aware). The second term is the same as the ﬂux of
linear momentum multiplied by minus the retarded time
u. The multipolar expansion of the linear-momentum
ﬂux has been computed before (for example, in [
30]).
The integrals of products of three spin-weighted spher-
ical harmonics that arise in the ﬂux of the CM angular
momentum are relatively simple functions of l andm. It
will be helpful to deﬁne a few coeﬃcients, so as to express
the multipolar expansion for the CM angular momentum
ﬂux produced by GWs more concisely. These coeﬃcients
7 Because GWs carry away energy from an isolated system with
no incoming radiation, the ﬂux is always negative. Thus, it h as
become a common convention (e.g., [
30]) to deﬁne the energy
carried away by GWs as a positive number, with it being im-
plicit that this positive change in the energy causes the Bon di
mass of the system to decrease. Similar sign conventions are
used for the linear momentum and intrinsic part of the angula r
momentum. W e also follow this convention with the ﬂux of CM
angular momentum, but we add the superscript “(GW)” to this
ﬂux to make this convention explicit.
are
al =
√
(l − 1)(l + 3)
(2l + 1)(2l + 3), (2.35a)
b(±)
lm =
√
(l ±m + 1)(l ±m + 2), (2.35b)
clm =
√
(l −m + 1)(l +m + 1), (2.35c)
d(±)
lm =
√
(l ±m + 1)(l ∓m). (2.35d)
After a lengthy calculation, it is possible to write the ﬁrst
term on the right-hand side of Eq. (
2.34) as
dk(GW)
1,0
du = − 1
64π
√
3
π
∑
l,m
alclm[ ¯Ulm ˙U(l+1)m
− ¯U(l+1)m ˙Ulm + ¯Vlm ˙V(l+1)m
− ¯V(l+1)m ˙Vlm], (2.36a)
dk(GW)
1,±1
du = − 1
64π
√
3
2π
∑
l,m
al[b(±)
lm ( ¯Ulm ˙U(l+1)m±1
+ ¯Vlm ˙V(l+1)m±1) −b(∓)
lm ( ¯U(l+1)m∓1 ˙Ulm
+ ¯V(l+1)m∓1 ˙Vlm)], (2.36b)
and the second term as
dP (GW)
1,0
du = 1
32π
√
3
π
∑
l,m
1
l + 1 [alclm( ˙¯Ulm ˙U(l+1)m
+ ˙¯Vlm ˙V(l+1)m) − 2im
l
˙¯Ulm ˙Vlm], (2.37a)
dP (GW)
1,±1
du = 1
32π
√
3
2π
∑
l,m
1
l + 1 [alb(±)
lm ( ˙¯Ulm ˙U(l+1)m±1
+ ˙¯Vlm ˙V(l+1)m±1) ± 2i
l d(±)
lm
˙¯Ulm ˙Vl(m±1)].
(2.37b)
All the sums in Eqs. ( 2.36) and ( 2.37) run over l ≥ 2,
and −l ≤m ≤l.
The translation subgroup of the BMS group is four-
dimensional, and it can be treated as a manifold with
a ﬂat Minkowski metric (see, e.g., [
37]). We can then
express the l = 1 moments of the ﬂux of CM angular
momentum in terms of vectors on this ﬂat Minkowski
manifold. Here, we will give the components in a set
of Cartesian-type coordinates, ( x,y,z ), which we de-
ﬁne from the spherical-polar coordinates (θ,φ ) commonly
used with the spherical harmonics employed in this pa-
per. A method to transform from the l = 1 moments to
the Cartesian components is described in [
16], which we
now summarize.
First, deﬁne the unit vector ni and its gradient with
respect to the derivative operator DA via
ni = (sinθ cosφ, sinθ sinφ, cosθ), e i
A =DAni.
(2.38)
12
The 1-form DA ¯Y1,m can then be expressed in terms of a
linear combination of the Cartesian components of ei
A as
DA ¯Y1,m =ω1,m
0i ei
A, (2.39)
where the coeﬃcients ω1,m
0i are given by
ω1,0
0x = 0 = ω1,0
0y , ω 1,0
0z = 1
2
√
3
π (2.40a)
ω1,±1
0x = ∓ 1
2
√
3
2π, ω 1,±1
0y = i
2
√
3
2π, ω 1,±1
0z = 0.
(2.40b)
Then, from the fact that the ﬂux of CM angular momen-
tum satisﬁes
dK (GW)
1,m
du =ω0i
dK i
(GW)
du , (2.41)
we ﬁnd that the Cartesian components are
dK x
(GW)
du = −
√
2π
3
[(
dk(GW)
1,1
du − dk(GW)
1,−1
du
)
−u
(
dP (GW)
1,1
du − dP (GW)
1,−1
du
)]
, (2.42a)
dK y
(GW)
du = −i
√
2π
3
[(
dk(GW)
1,1
du + dk(GW)
1,−1
du
)
−u
(
dP (GW)
1,1
du + dP (GW)
1,−1
du
)]
, (2.42b)
dK z
(GW)
du =2
√ π
3
(
dk(GW)
1,0
du −udP (GW)
1,0
du
)
. (2.42c)
As was explained in more detail in the previous subsec-
tion, the ﬂux in Eq. (
2.42) represents the change in the
CM part of the angular momentum, for which the origin
of the retarded time coordinate is chosen to be u = 0. It
contains nontrivial information about the ﬂux of CM an-
gular momentum from the system that is not contained
in the ﬂuxes of the other BMS charges.
III. CENTER-OF-MASS
GRA VITATIONAL-W A VE MEMOR Y EFFECT
In this section, after giving an argument for why the
CM memory eﬀect should exist, we deﬁne the eﬀect, de-
scribe some of its basic properties, and derive an expan-
sion for the CM memory eﬀect in terms of multipole mo-
ments of the GW strain.
A. Rationale for the existence of the CM memory
eﬀect
Consider, for simplicity, an asymptotically ﬂat space-
time undergoing a stationary-to-stationary transition as
it radiates GWs for a ﬁnite time. In each stationary re-
gion, there is a canonical reference frame in which the
Bondi mass aspect is constant, the shear vanishes, and
the Bondi angular-momentum aspect is a linear combina-
tion of l = 1 magnetic-parity vector spherical harmonics
(though the values of the mass and angular-momentum
aspects will generally be diﬀerent in the canonical frames
of the two stationary regions). The two canonical frames
typically will not be the same, but there will be a
BMS transformation (a Lorentz transformation and su-
pertranslation) that relates the two. The supertransla-
tion between the two canonical frames is equivalent to the
GW memory (e.g., [
16]), and the Lorentz transformation
is related to the change in the 4-momentum between and
the relative rotation of a set of ﬁducial observers in each
of the two stationary regions.
Next, we integrate Eq. (
2.24) with respect to u to relate
the change in the charges to the net ﬂux between the cuts:
∆ K⃗ζY
= − 1
64π
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2ΩY A[uDA(2DBDCN BC
−NBCN BC − 32π ˆTuu) +CBCDBNAC
−N BCDBCAC + 3NABDCCBC
− 3CABDCCBC + 64π ˆTuA + 16π∂u ˆTrA].
(3.1)
The left-hand side of Eq. ( 3.1), the change in the charges,
depends on just the values of the 4-momentum and angu-
lar momentum in the canonical frames in the stationary
regions and the BMS transformation that contains infor-
mation about the net rotation, boost, and supertrans-
lation between the two canonical frames. We argued in
Sec.
II, however, that the net change in the (super-) CM
angular momentum, as computed using the right-hand
side of Eq. (
3.1), contains additional information besides
the change in the supermomentum, angular momentum,
and GW memory. Thus, there appears to be an incon-
sistency. It could be resolved, if there is a cancellation
between certain terms in the ﬂux, for example.
Such a cancellation occurs with the GW memory,
which we will now review. First, recall that the potential
∆Φ that determines the memory [see Eq. (
2.16)] can be
found by integrating the conservation-type equation for
the Bondi mass aspect (
2.5):
D∆Φ = P
[
8∆ m +
∫ u2
u1
du(32π ˆTuu +NABN AB)
]
(3.2)
(see, e.g., [ 16]). We have deﬁned a diﬀerential operator
D ≡ D2(D2 + 2) (3.3)
and a projector P, which removes the l = 0 and l = 1
spherical harmonics from the right-hand side of Eq. ( 3.2).
The projector is needed to invert the operator D and
solve for ∆Φ, because the l = 0 and l = 1 harmonics
are in its kernel of the operator D. In the terminology
of [27], the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side in Eq. ( 3.2) is
13
the ordinary part of the GW memory, and the remaining
terms in the integral are collectively the null part of the
memory. We will, therefore, express ∆Φ as a sum of two
parts
∆Φ = ∆Φ (o) + ∆Φ (n), (3.4)
which correspond to the parts of the solution to Eq. (
3.2)
for the ordinary and null parts, respectively (and which
is possible because the equation is linear in ∆Φ).
Now, let us return to the cancellation that occurs for
the GW memory eﬀect. The ordinary part of the mem-
ory (the change in the supermomentum charges, up to a
normalization factor) depends on just the net change in
the rest mass of the system and the relative boost of the
observers that determine the canonical frames. The null
memory, however, can be arbitrary. Thus, the integral of
DADBN AB with respect to u must be nonzero, so that
Einstein’s equations (and, equivalently, charge conserva-
tion) are satisﬁed. For the spin memory, the values of
the change in the superspin charges are also restricted in
a stationary-to-stationary transition, but the null part of
the spin memory is not limited in this way. The addi-
tional term in the ﬂux, Eq. (
2.12), therefore, is necessary
to ensure that charge conservation holds.
Finally, let us revisit the “inconsistency” discussed be-
low Eq. ( 3.1) about the change in the charges in light of
the discussion above. The related inconsistencies for su-
permomentum and superspin charge conservation were
resolved by the GW memory and spin memory eﬀects,
respectively. Thus, it seems natural to suggest a simi-
lar resolution for super-CM charge conservation: namely,
that there must be a CM memory eﬀect. Because the GW
memory and spin memory eﬀects come about from terms
in the ﬂuxes that are linear in the Bondi news and shear
tensors, respectively, we expect that the CM memory will
arise from a similar type of term in the ﬂux of CM angular
momentum. The term linear in the Bondi news tensor in
Eq. (
3.1) (proportional to uDADBDCN BC ), therefore,
is the most obvious term that could give rise to the CM
memory. As we discuss in the next subsection, it turns
out to be the u integral of a quantity related to this term
that will be the CM memory eﬀect.
B. Deﬁnition and properties of the CM memory
eﬀect
Let us then deﬁne a quantity
∆ C(DAY A) ≡ −
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2Ω u
(
DBDCN BC − 1
2 D ˙Φ (n)
)
× (DAY A), (3.5)
which should be interpreted as a part of u times the u in-
tegral of a quantity proportional to a portion of the Bondi
news tensor, with the part of the news tensor responsi-
ble for the null GW memory removed [this latter part of
the news tensor is denoted by the potential ˙Φ (n)].
8 This
quantity has the units of the time integral of the GW
strain (like the spin memory eﬀect), and it will be our
deﬁnition of the CM memory eﬀect. We now investigate
some of its properties.
Integrating Eq. (
3.5) by parts with respect to u, we
ﬁnd that
∆ C(DAY A) =
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2Ω
(
DBDCCBC − 1
2 DΦ (n)
)
× (DAY A) −u
∫
d2Ω(DAY A)
×
(
DBDCCBC − 1
2 DΦ (n)
) ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
u2
u1
. (3.6)
Thus, we see that ∆ C(DAY A) contains information about
the time integral of CAB, but it removes the part that
grows linearly with u, which arises when there is ordi-
nary GW memory.
9 It is, therefore, the part of the time
integral of the electric-parity part of CAB that becomes
constant in a stationary-to-stationary transition.
Next, we will consider how the CM memory eﬀect be-
haves in a set of cuts that are supertranslated from the
cutsu used to compute the eﬀect above. Under a super-
translation, α, the news tensor transforms as
δNAB =α ˙NAB, (3.7)
to linear order in α. Using this relationship, integration
by parts, and the facts that u′ = u +α and the news
tensor and ˆTuu vanish in a nonradiative region, it is then
straightforward to show from Eq. (
3.5) that
∆ C′
(DAY A) = −
∫ u′
2
u′
1
du′
∫
d2Ωu′
(
DBDCN ′
BC
− 1
2 D ˙Φ ′
(n)
)
(DAY A) = ∆ C(DAY A). (3.8)
In the equation above, we computed ∆ C′
(DAY A) with re-
spect to the generators adapted to cuts of constant u′.
Thus, ∆ C(DAY A) is invariant under inﬁnitesimal super-
translations, for stationary-to-stationary transitions.
When computing memory eﬀects within the Bondi
framework, it can be useful to deﬁne a scalar potential as8 Using Einstein’s equations ( 2.5), we could have written this as a
term proportional to u times the u derivative of the Bondi mass
aspect. W e deliberately avoided writing it in this form, so a s to
reinforce the notion that this is an observable with the unit s of
the time integral of the GW strain, rather than a quantity wit h
the units of the time integral of the supermomentum.
9 A similar caveat to that elaborated in footnote 6 holds: namely,
for ﬁnite values of u1 and u2, we do not need to suppose that
the ordinary GW memory approaches a constant at a given rate;
however, in the limit that u1 → −∞ and u2 → +∞ , we would
need to assume similar fall-oﬀ rates to those given for the su per-
momentum in footnote
6.
14
the memory observable (see, e.g., [ 16]). We now deﬁne
this quantity. The shear tensor, CAB, can be expressed
in terms of two potentials that encompass its two degrees
of freedom as follows:
CAB = 1
2 (2DADB −hABD2)Φ + ǫC(ADB)DC Ψ . (3.9)
Using this decomposition and integrating by parts with
respect to u, we ﬁnd that Eq. (
3.5) can be written as
∆ C(DAY A) = 1
2
∫
d2Ω(DAY A)D
[ ∫ u2
u1
du(Φ − Φ (n))
−u(Φ − Φ (n))|u2
u1
]
. (3.10)
The CM memory observable that we deﬁne is
∆ K ≡
∫ u2
u1
du (Φ − Φ (n)) −u(Φ − Φ (n))|u2
u1, (3.11)
which is a potential for the time integral of the electric-
parity part of the shear with the part that grows linearly
with u from the ordinary part of the GW memory re-
moved.
10 The quantity ∆ C(DAY A) can be expressed in
terms of ∆ K by
∆ C(DAY A) = 1
2
∫
d2Ω(DAY A)D∆ K. (3.12)
Using Eq. ( 3.1), we can also solve for ∆ C(DAY A) from
the change in the super-CM angular momentum and the
quadrupole and higher multipole moments of the ﬂux
of CM angular momentum carried by GWs and matter
ﬁelds:
∆ C(DAY A) = − 32πP∆ K⃗ζY
− 1
2 P
∫ u2
u1
du
∫
d2ΩY A
× (CBCDBNAC −N BCDBCAC
+ 3NABDCCBC − 3CABDCCBC
+ 64π ˆTuA + 16π∂u ˆTrA). (3.13)
10 Given the somewhat complicated nature of the CM memory ob-
servable, the reader might be concerned about whether this q uan-
tity is measurable by freely falling observers, in principl e. Be-
cause the GW strain, the GW memory, and their time integrals
can be measured by freely falling observers, the basic ingre dients
needed to construct the CM memory observable are measurable .
The CM memory eﬀect corresponds to the electric-parity part
of the time-integrated GW strain, and this part could be sepa -
rated from the magnetic-parity part by having many observer s
surrounding an isolated source measuring the GW strain. Thu s,
the one remaining potential subtlety relates to extracting just
the null part of the memory. This could be performed by di-
rectly measuring the ﬂux of GWs and massless ﬁelds with ap-
propriate detectors or by determining the time dependence o f
the ordinary part of the memory (i.e., the ﬂux of the supermo-
mentum charges) by measuring components of the asymptotic
Riemann tensor with a generalization of the procedure descr ibed
in [
52, 53], for example. Thus, we see no obstacle for observing
the CM memory, in principle, but a more detailed analysis of i ts
measurability would be beneﬁcial.
As with the GW memory and spin memory, the CM
memory has two parts: the ﬁrst given by ∆ K⃗ζY
is the or-
dinary part, whereas the portion involving the retarded-
time integral is the null part. Because the CM memory
is invariant under inﬁnitesimal supertranslations, but the
changes in the CM part of the super angular momentum
transform in the way given in Eq. (
2.22), then the ordi-
nary and null parts of the CM memory must transform
in opposite ways.
To more easily compute the amplitude of the CM mem-
ory eﬀect produced by astrophysical sources, we expand
Eq. (
3.13) in a set of multipole moments of the GW strain
in the next subsection.
C. Multipolar expansion of the CM memory eﬀect
We ﬁnd it simplest to compute the multipole moments
of the CM memory eﬀect by integrating the right-hand
side of Eq. (
3.13) with respect to the smooth vector ﬁelds.
Speciﬁcally, we use the electric-parity vector spherical
harmonics, DA ¯Ylm/
√
l(l + 1) (analogously to what was
done in the calculation of the spin memory in [ 19]). These
functions are a useful basis for smooth vector ﬁelds,
like those used by Campiglia and Laddha [
14, 15]. Be-
cause the integral of a meromorphic super-rotation vec-
tor ﬁeld [
12] with a smooth vector ﬁeld is ﬁnite (see,
e.g., [ 16]), then it could also represent the part of the
super-rotation symmetry that has overlap with these
vector spherical harmonics (although this decomposition
may not be unique [
47]).
The method for calculating the multipole moments of
the CM memory observable, which we will denote by
∆ Klm, is very similar to the procedure to compute sim-
ilar moments of the spin memory described in [
19] (as
well as that described in Sec. II for computing the multi-
pole moments of the CM angular-momentum ﬂux). The
basic strategy of the calculation is to change the tenso-
rial expression for the multipole moments of the shear
and its derivatives into a sum of products of three spin-
weighted spherical harmonics. The conventions for the
vector, tensor, and spin-weighted harmonics are given in
detail in [
19]. Using these conventions, we deﬁne a set of
coeﬃcients
Bl(s′,l ′,m ′;s′′,l ′′,m ′′) ≡∫
d2Ω( s′Yl′m′ )(s′′Yl′′m′′ )(s′+s′′ ¯Yl(m′+m′′)), (3.14)
as in [ 19].11 We have restricted to integrals in which the
complex-conjugated spin-weighted spherical harmonic
11 The coeﬃcients Bl(s′, l′, m′; s′′, l′′, m′′) are identical to the coef-
ﬁcients denoted Cl(s′, l′, m′; s′′, l′′, m′′) in [ 19]; however, we have
renamed them here, so as to avoid confusion with the quantity
∆ C(DAY A ) that is related to the CM memory eﬀect.
15
has spin weight s = s′ + s′′ and has azimuthal num-
ber m = m′ +m′′, because the integrals are zero for all
other values of s and m. Furthermore, the only values
ofl for which the integral is nonvanishing are those with
l ∈ {max(|l′−l′′|, |m′+m′′|, |s′+s′′|),...,l ′+l′′−1,l ′+l′′}.
The reason for these “selection rules” comes from the
fact that the coeﬃcients Bl(s′,l ′,m ′;s′′,l ′′,m ′′) can be
expressed in terms of products of Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃ-
cients ⟨l′,m ′;l′′,m ′′|l,m ′ +m′′⟩ via the relationship
Bl(s′,l ′,m ′;s′′,l ′′,m ′′)
= (−1)l+l′+l′′
√
(2l′ + 1)(2l′′ + 1)
4π(2l + 1)
× ⟨l′,s ′;l′′,s ′′|l,s ′ +s′′⟩⟨l′,m ′;l′′,m ′′|l,m ′ +m′′⟩.
(3.15)
These coeﬃcients, therefore, satisfy similar identities to
those of the Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients when the signs
of the spin weight or the azimuthal numbers are changed
(see, e.g., [
19]).
Next, we specialize to vacuum spacetimes, and we com-
pute the multipole moments ∆ Klm of the CM memory
produced by GWs. Nonvacuum cases can be treated by
simply adding the appropriate multipole moments of the
relevant components of the stress-energy tensor given in
Eq. (
3.13). To make the expression more compact, we
write the result as
∆ Klm = (l − 2)!
(l + 2)!
1√
l(l + 1)
P
( ∫ u2
u1
dudk(CM)
lm
du
+ 64π∆ Klm
)
. (3.16)
The ﬁrst term in the integral dk(CM)
lm /du comes from the
higher multipole moments of the quantity that gives rise
to the term dk(GW)
1m /du in the ﬂux of CM angular momen-
tum (though with a diﬀerent overall normalization). The
second term, ∆ Klm, is a spherical harmonic moment of
the change in the super-CM charges ∆ K⃗ζY
. Before giv-
ing the explicit form of the term dk(CM)
lm /du, we make a
few additional deﬁnitions of coeﬃcients so as to write the
result more compactly:
sl,(±)
l′;l′′ =1 ± (−1)l+l′+l′′
, (3.17a)
cl
l′,m′;l′′,m′′ =3
√
(l′ − 1)(l′ + 2)Bl(−1,l ′,m ′; 2,l ′′,m ′′)
+
√
(l′′ − 2)(l′′ + 3)Bl(−2,l ′,m ′; 3,l ′′,m ′′).
(3.17b)
After a lengthy calculation, it is possible to show that
dk(CM)
lm
du = 1
4
∑
l′,l′′,m′,m′′
cl
l′,m′;l′′,m′′ [sl,(+)
l′;l′′ (Ul′m′ ˙Ul′′m′′
− ˙Ul′m′Ul′′m′′ +Vl′m′ ˙Vl′′m′′ − ˙Vl′m′Vl′′m′′ )
+isl,(−)
l′;l′′ (Ul′m′ ˙Vl′′m′′ + ˙Vl′m′Ul′′m′′
− ˙Ul′m′Vl′′m′′ −Vl′m′ ˙Ul′′m′′ )]. (3.18)
The sum runs over l′,l ′′ ≥ 2, and for −l′ ≤ m′ ≤ l′ and
−l′′ ≤m′′ ≤l′′. For an arbitrary source, an inﬁnite num-
ber of products of multipoles will be needed to compute
the CM memory eﬀect. For compact binaries in the PN
approximation, the number of multipole moments that
contribute at leading order is a small number, as we dis-
cuss next.
IV. FLUX OF CM ANGULAR MOMENTUM
AND CM MEMOR Y IN THE PN
APPROXIMATION
In this part, we introduce a few essential elements of
the PN formalism for compact binaries that we need for
the calculations in this section. Our summary is based
on the much more comprehensive review [
42]. We then
present the main results of this section: expressions for
the leading-PN-order ﬂux of CM angular momentum and
CM memory eﬀect for nonspinning, quasicircular com-
pact binaries. We also comment on the terms in the
gravitational waveform responsible for producing the CM
memory eﬀect and on the prospects for detecting these
features in the waveform with future GW detectors.
A. Summary of selected results from PN theory
In PN theory, the gravitational waveform is typically
described by a transverse-traceless tensor hTT
ij . It can be
expanded in second-rank electric- and magnetic-parity
tensor spherical harmonics as
hTT
ij = 1
r
∑
l,m
(UlmT (e),lm
ij +VlmT (b),lm
ij ), (4.1)
where the sum runs over l ≥ 2 and −l ≤ m ≤ l. It
was argued in [ 19] that the coeﬃcients Ulm andVlm that
appear in both Eqs. ( 2.30) and ( 4.1) are the same in
linearized theory (though care would need to be taken
to properly include any nondynamical terms in hTT
ij , as
noted by [
48]). It is often convenient to work with the
complex GW strain h = h+ −ih×, which is related to
the tensorial strains by
h =r−1CAB ¯mA ¯mB =hTT
ij ei
Aej
B ¯mA ¯mB, (4.2)
where mA is deﬁned in Eq. (
2.33) and ei
A is given in
Eq. (
2.38). When h is expanded in spin-weighted spher-
ical harmonics, a short calculation shows that
h =
∑
l,m
hlm(−2Ylm), h lm = 1
r
√
2 (Ulm −iVlm).
(4.3)
The convention used here for h diﬀers from that in [ 42]
by an overall minus sign, but the multipole moments Ulm
andVlm as well as the tensorial GW strain agree (as they
must).
16
Through a matching procedure, summarized in the re-
view [ 42], it is possible to relate the radiative moments
Ulm and Vlm to source multipole moments, Ilm and Jlm
that, as their name suggests, describe the multipole mo-
ments of the source in the near zone. To simplify the
matching, we will choose our coordinates such that the
orbital angular momentum of our nonspinning, compact-
binary source points in the z coordinate direction. The
matching procedure takes place through a third set of in-
termediate “canonical” multipole moments,
12 Mlm and
Slm, as well as a set of multipole moments that parame-
terize a coordinate transformation between two solutions
of the linearized Einstein’s equations. For multipoles
with m ⁄= 0, the relationship between the radiative and
canonical moments is given by
Ulm =M (l)
lm +O(c−3), V lm =S(l)
lm +O(c−3), (4.4)
where here—and everywhere else hereafter—the remain-
der means there are relative PN corrections (where PN
corrections conventionally scale as the power of c to the
minus one-half), and where the superscript ( l) means
to take l derivatives with respect to u. These correc-
tions consist of terms that get called “tails” (including
higher PN-order generalizations, such as “tails of tails”),
“instantaneous” nonlinear terms, and “hereditary” (or
“memory”) terms. For understanding the terms in the
GWs that give rise to the CM memory eﬀect, the instan-
taneous, nonlinear terms will play the most important
role. The canonical moments are related to the source
moments by
Mlm =Ilm +O(c−5), S lm =Jlm +O(c−5). (4.5)
The 2.5PN remainder here means that there are addi-
tional nonlinear terms entering at this order in the PN
expansion that are not captured by the PN expansion of
the source multipoles Ilm and Jlm to that PN order.
For computing the leading-order ﬂux of CM angular
momentum and the CM memory eﬀect, it turns out that
we will be able to use the leading Newtonian expres-
sions for the radiative multipole moments in terms of
the source moments (for m ⁄= 0),
Ulm =I (l)
lm +O(c−3), V lm =J (l)
lm +O(c−3). (4.6)
TheU2,0 mode below comes from the GW memory, which
does not satisfy Eq. (
4.6), even though it is a leading,
Newtonian-order eﬀect in the waveform. We will also
need to use one higher-PN-order calculation for the ﬂux
of linear momentum carried by GWs. For comparing the
parts of the GWs responsible for the CM memory with
12 While the term “canonical” is used to describe both these mo-
ments and a speciﬁc Bondi frame associated with a stationary
region in asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes, this repeated usa ge is
just an unfortunate repetition of the term “canonical”; the re is
no obvious connection between the two concepts.
the expressions for the multipole moments of the wave-
form in PN theory, however, we will need to be aware of
the higher-order PN corrections to the radiative multi-
pole moments. Given that the corrections have distinct
mathematical forms (tail, instantaneous, and hereditary
terms), we will be able to identify the relevant nonlinear
terms to make this comparison analytically. Identifying
these terms observationally in the GWs from compact-
binary mergers will be much more challenging.
For nonspinning compact binary sources in quasicircu-
lar orbits, the radiative multipole moments can be ex-
pressed conveniently in terms of just a few parameters,
most of which involve the masses of the two bodies, m(A)
and m(B): the total mass M = m(A) +m(B), the mass
diﬀerence δm = m(A) −m(B), the symmetric mass ra-
tio η = m(A)m(B)/M2, the orbital frequency ω, the PN
parameter x = (Mω )2/3, and the orbital phase ϕ (see,
e.g., [
42]). In terms of these quantities, the radiative mo-
ments that we will need for our calculations are
U2,2 = − 8
√
2π
5 Mηxe −i2ϕ +O(c−2), (4.7a)
U2,0 = 4
7
√
5π
3 Mηx +O(c−2), (4.7b)
U3,1 = − 2i
3
√ π
35δmηx3/2e−iϕ +O(c−2), (4.7c)
U3,3 =6i
√
3π
7 δmηx3/2e−i3ϕ +O(c−2), (4.7d)
V2,1 = 8
3
√
2π
5 δmηx3/2e−iϕ +O(c−2), (4.7e)
where the orbital phase is given by
ϕ = −x−5/2
32η +O(c−2). (4.8)
The modes with negative azimuthal number can be ob-
tained by using the relationships given in Eq. (
2.32).
Theu derivatives of these multipole moments can be ex-
pressed in terms of x by using the chain rule and the fact
that
˙x = 64η
5Mx5 +O(c−2). (4.9)
The results are as follows:
˙U2,2 =16i
√
2π
5 ηx5/2e−i2ϕ +O(c−2), (4.10a)
˙U2,0 = 256
7
√ π
15η2x5 +O(c−2), (4.10b)
˙U3,1 = − 2
3
√ π
35
δm
M ηx3e−iϕ +O(c−2), (4.10c)
˙U3,3 =18
√
3π
7
δm
M ηx3e−i3ϕ +O(c−2), (4.10d)
˙V2,1 = − 8i
3
√
2π
5
δm
M ηx3e−iϕ +O(c−2). (4.10e)
17
Because the quantity ˙U2,0 is several PN orders higher
than the other derivatives, it will not appear in most of
the calculations below.
B. Flux of CM angular momentum
In this part, we give the leading-PN order expression
for the ﬂux of the CM part of the angular momentum. We
begin by computing the term dk(GW)
1,1 /du in Eq. (
2.34).
It is given by
dk(GW)
1,1
du = − 1
64π
√
3
7π [
√
15(U2,−2 ˙U3,3 +U3,3 ˙U2,−2)
+ (U2,2 ˙U3,−1 +U3,−1 ˙U2,2) +
√
6U2,0 ˙U3,1]
+O(c−2). (4.11)
Substituting the relevant components in Eqs. ( 4.7)
and ( 4.10) into Eq. ( 4.11), we ﬁnd that it can be written
as a function of x as follows:
dk(GW)
1,1
du = 627
980
√
3
2πδmη 2x4e−iϕ +O(c−2). (4.12)
The l = 1, m = 0 term vanishes for nonspinning, qua-
sicircular compact binaries. This can be shown using
arguments based on parity, like those given in [
54].
The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 2.34)
requires computing the ﬂux of linear momentum. This
has been computed before (it can be inferred from [
55],
for example) and is given by
dP (GW)
1,1
du = 1
96π
√
3
7π (
√
15 ˙U2,−2 ˙U3,3 + ˙U2,2 ˙U3,−1
+i
√
14 ˙U2,2 ˙V2,−1) +O(c−2), (4.13)
at leading PN order. Inserting the appropriate values of
the radiative moments given in Eq. (
4.10) into Eq. ( 4.13),
we ﬁnd
dP (GW)
1,1
du = −i 232
105
√
3
2π
δm
M η2x11/2e−iϕ +O(c−2),
(4.14)
a result that traces back to [ 56]. The l = 1, m = 0
mode of the ﬂux of linear momentum also vanishes, which
follows from the arguments based on parity in [
54].
To compute the net change in the CM angular momen-
tum, we must evaluate
∆ K (GW)
1,1 =
∫
du
(
dk(GW)
1,1
du −udP (GW)
1,1
du
)
. (4.15)
Because at leading order, the retarded time u goes as
(uc −u) = 5M
256ηx−4 +O(c−2) (4.16)
(whereuc is the retarded time of coalescence of the binary
in PN theory), then by comparing powers of x, we see
that the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 4.15) is
2.5 PN orders higher than the second term is. While this
might make the reader wonder why we do not neglect this
term and focus just on the second term, we now revisit
some of the discussion around Eqs. (
2.28) and ( 2.29) in
the context of nonspinning PN compact binaries.
In PN theory, the BMS supertranslations are ﬁxed by
the ﬁducial Minkowski spacetime that is the background
about which the PN expansion is computed. This leaves
the Poincar´ e group as the remaining symmetries. There
is a relatively natural way to ﬁx the boost transforma-
tions (by moving to the rest frame of the source in the
initial stationary region, for example). The rotations in
the Lorentz group can be speciﬁed by aligning the or-
bital angular momentum to fall along the z axis and the
separation to be along the x axis (at some ﬁducial time)
in the initial stationary region. Finally, one way to con-
strain the spatial translations is to require that the CM
of the system coincide with the origin of the coordinates
initially. This will make the CM part of the angular
momentum equal to zero in this region. A translation in
time will not aﬀect the values of the 4-momentum, super-
momentum, and (super) angular momentum in the initial
stationary region in this frame. Thus, there is no obvi-
ous prescription for using the (extended) BMS charges
in a stationary region to constrain this remaining degree
of freedom in the BMS group. However, the ﬂux of (su-
per) CM angular momentum is not invariant under such
transformations in a stationary-to-stationary transition,
as was highlighted in Eq. (
2.28). To compute this ﬂux,
therefore, it is necessary to specify a reference time u0
about which it is computed. We will use the prescrip-
tion deﬁned in Eq. (
2.29) that minimizes the ﬂux of the
CM angular momentum in our computation below. This
then ﬁxes the previously unconstrained time-translation
freedom in the BMS group.
As was shown in [
57], through 2PN order, the ﬂux of
linear momentum is parallel to the orbital velocity of the
reduced mass of the system (and thus the change in the
linear momentum is directed radially outward). In terms
of the multipole moment dP (GW)
1,1 /du, this is related to
the fact that the coeﬃcient multiplying e−iϕ is a strictly
imaginary quantity (i.e., has vanishing real part) through
2PN order. With the one real degree of freedom in u0, we
can choose this reference time to make the ﬂux of the CM
part of the angular momentum arising from the second
term in Eq. (
4.15) vanish through 2PN order.
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 4.15),
however, leads to a change in the CM angular momen-
tum that is π/2 out of phase with that from the second
term at 2PN order [i.e., the coeﬃcient multiplying e−iϕ
for dk(GW)
1,1 /du is real]. In addition, the 2.5PN correc-
tions to dP (GW)
1,1 /du have terms that are in phase with
dk(GW)
1,1 /du. It is possible to continue canceling the imag-
inary part of the coeﬃcient of e−iϕ of the second term in
Eq. (
4.15) through 2.5PN order by appropriately choos-
ing the reference time u0; however, it is not possible also
18
to cancel the real part of this coeﬃcient in this man-
ner. This implies that to compute the leading-PN-order
expression for the ﬂux of the CM angular momentum,
we need the leading-order expression for dk(GW)
1,1 /du in
Eq. (
4.12), the leading-order expression for the time to
coalescence in Eq. ( 4.16), and a 2.5PN order correction
to the leading expression for dP (GW)
1,1 /du in Eq. ( 4.14)
[speciﬁcally, the part that is in phase with dk(GW)
1,1 /du].
Thus, with this choice of reference time, the two terms on
the right-hand side of Eq. (
4.15) contribute at the same
PN order.
The relevant 2.5PN corrections to the linear momen-
tum ﬂux have been computed in [ 58] for nonspinning,
quasicircular compact binaries. We express their result
in terms of the l = 1, m = 1 moment of the ﬂux by using
the fact that
dP1,1
du = − 1
2
√
3
2π
( dPx
du −idPy
du
)
, (4.17)
which can be obtained by inverting a relation like the
one given in Eq. (
2.42). It then follows from the results
of [ 58] that
dP (2.5PN)
1,1
du =ix5/2
(
dP (GW)
1,1
du
)
(
p(0) +p(1)η
)
, (4.18)
where we have deﬁned the coeﬃcients
p(0) = − 106187
50460 + 32835
841 log 2 − 77625
3364 log 3, (4.19a)
p(1) = 10126
4205 − 109740
841 log 2 + 66645
841 log 3. (4.19b)
We can then integrate the ﬂux with respect to u. To
evaluate the integral, we change variables to write it as
an integral with respect to x by using Eq. (
4.9). We ﬁnd
that the result can be expressed in terms of the ﬂuxes in
Eqs. (
4.12) and ( 4.18) as
∆ K (GW)
1,1 =iMx −3/2
(
dk(GW)
1,1
du + 5M
256ηx−4dP (2.5PN)
1,1
du
)
+O(c−2). (4.20)
The quantity ∆ K (GW)
1,1 scales with the PN parameter x
as x5/2e−iϕ. We have not seen an expression for the
change in the CM part of the angular momentum be-
fore, although it is may be related to a part of the time-
dependent mass-dipole moment computed in [
59], for ex-
ample.
It is relatively straightforward to understand the
physics underlying Eq. ( 4.20). For nonspinning compact
binaries in quasicircular orbits, the orbital velocity is tan-
gent to the circular orbit up to 2PN order. At 2.5PN
order, however, radiation reaction causes the system to
inspiral, thereby producing a small radial velocity. It is
not possible to remove the eﬀects of this radial velocity on
the CM angular momentum while preserving the proper-
ties of the canonical frame associated with the initial sta-
tionary region. This implies that there is a change in the
CM part of the angular momentum, given by Eq. (
4.20).
To conclude this subsection, we brieﬂy discuss radia-
tion reaction and balance equations in PN theory (in the
sense of [
60]). The ﬂuxes of energy and intrinsic angular
momentum cause the corresponding conserved Poincar´ e
charges in the near zone to change at 2.5PN order, and
the ﬂux of linear momentum also causes such a change in
the corresponding charge, though at higher (3.5PN) or-
der. In general, the ﬂux of CM angular momentum also
produces a change in the near-zone CM angular momen-
tum that begins at 3.5PN order. For nonspinning, qua-
sicircular compact binary sources, however, we showed
that through an appropriate choice of reference time, the
ﬂux of CM angular momentum begins at 2.5PN orders
higher than the leading eﬀect (which, therefore, corre-
sponds to a 6PN-order eﬀect in the near zone). Because
the conserved quantities for nonspinning compact bina-
ries in PN theory are currently computed to 4PN or-
der [
61], this ﬂux leads to a change in the CM angular
momentum that is two PN orders higher than the ac-
curacy of the CM angular momentum computed in [
61].
Thus, we do not anticipate that the ﬂux of CM angular
momentum will have a signiﬁcant impact on computa-
tions of the dynamics of nonspinning, quasicircular com-
pact binaries in the PN approximation.
C. Center-of-mass GW memory eﬀect
In the two parts of this section, we compute ﬁrst the
null and then the ordinary parts of the CM memory eﬀect
for nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries in the PN
approximation.
1. Nonlinear and null part of the CM memory
We compute the nonlinear part of the null CM mem-
ory from the multipolar expressions given in Eqs. (
3.16)
and ( 3.18) and the relevant deﬁnitions of the coeﬃcients
that appear in the latter equation. There are ﬁve (inde-
pendent) nonzero spherical-harmonic modes of this null
nonlinear CM memory at leading PN order, which are
given by
∆ K3,1 = 1
2880√π
∫ u2
u1
du[
√
10(U3,3 ˙U2,−2 − ˙U3,3U2,−2)
+ 2
√
6(U3,−1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,−1U2,2) + 3U2,0 ˙U3,1]
+O(c−2), (4.21a)
∆ K3,3 = 1
2880√π
∫ u2
u1
du[
√
10(U3,1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,1U2,2)
− 5U2,0 ˙U3,3] +O(c−2), (4.21b)
19
for the l = 3 modes and
∆ K5,1 = 1
50400
√
77π
∫ u2
u1
du[(U3,3 ˙U2,−2 − ˙U3,3U2,−2)+
√
15(U3,−1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,−1U2,2) − 3
√
10U2,0 ˙U3,1]
+O(c−2), (4.21c)
∆ K5,3 = 1
50400
√
11π
∫ u2
u1
du[
√
10(U3,1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,1U2,2)
− 2U2,0 ˙U3,3] +O(c−2), (4.21d)
∆ K5,5 = 1
1680
√
330π
∫ u2
u1
du(U3,3 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,3U2,2)
+O(c−2), (4.21e)
for the l = 5 modes. We can then substitute the expres-
sions for the multipole moments in Eqs. ( 4.7) and ( 4.10)
to ﬁnd that
∆ K3,1 =i 6463
12600
√ π
21Mδmη 2x5/2e−iϕ|x2
x1 +O(c−2),
(4.22a)
∆ K3,3 = −i 647
22680
√ π
35Mδmη 2x5/2e−3iϕ|x2
x1 +O(c−2),
(4.22b)
for the l = 3 modes and
∆ K5,1 =i 677
154350
√ π
330Mδmη 2x5/2e−iϕ|x2
x1 +O(c−2),
(4.22c)
∆ K5,3 = −i 11
198450
√
11π
35 Mδmη 2x5/2e−3iϕ|x2
x1 +O(c−2),
(4.22d)
∆ K5,5 =i 1
875
√ π
77Mδmη 2x5/2e−5iϕ|x2
x1 +O(c−2),
(4.22e)
for the l = 5 modes. We have used the notation x2 and
x1 to denote the values of the PN parameter at retarded
times u2 and u1, respectively. 13 Note that unlike the
leading-PN part of the GW memory or the spin memory
eﬀects, the leading nonlinear, null part of the CM mem-
ory eﬀect appears in the m ⁄= 0 modes of the multipolar
expansion of the eﬀect (speciﬁcally modes with odd m
13 Because x1 and x2 are related to the orbital frequency of the
binary at times u1 and u2, respectively, it is clear that the space-
time is not stationary at either time (which breaks one of the
assumptions we made in deriving the CM memory eﬀect). Thus,
the results presented in Eq. (
4.22) should be taken as suggestive
of how the CM memory eﬀect would grow with x, in the PN
context (namely, that it grows in amplitude like x5/ 2, like the
change in the CM angular momentum does). The full eﬀect will
depend on the details of the merger of the compact binary and
would need to be computed by numerical relativity simulatio ns
of merging compact objects.
and l). While there are higher-order PN corrections to
the GW and the spin memory eﬀects that appear in the
modes with nonzero m, it is a distinctive feature of the
CM memory that the leading-order nonlinear, null CM
memory eﬀect appears in modes with nonzero m. How-
ever, it is also not too surprising, because the ﬂux of CM
angular momentum for nonspinning, quasicircular com-
pact binaries has no m = 0 mode (only m = ±1 modes).
2. Ordinary part of the CM memory
A second interesting diﬀerence between the GW mem-
ory and spin memory eﬀects and the CM memory eﬀect
is the role of the ordinary part of the memory. In the
PN approximation for nonspinning, quasicircular com-
pact binaries, the nonlinear null GW memory appears at
leading Newtonian order in the waveform, whereas the or-
dinary part of the memory is typically ignored, because
it will appear at a PN order that is much higher than
that at which the PN-expanded gravitational waveform
has been computed. For the spin memory, the ordinary
part of the memory is again of a very high PN order.
Let us now consider the ordinary part of the CM mem-
ory eﬀect. It was shown in [
16] that the change in the
super-CM charges is nonzero when there is GW memory.
To linear order in the GW memory, this change is given
by
∆ Klm = − 3M
16π
√
l(l + 1)∆Φ lm, (4.23)
where ∆Φ lm are the moments of the scalar function ∆Φ
in Eq. ( 2.16) with respect to scalar spherical harmonics
(recall that ∆ Klm was computed with respect to electric-
parity vector spherical harmonics). The leading GW
memory appears in the m = 0 modes with l = 2 and
l = 4, and the values of the potential ∆Φ lm are given,
for example, in [
19]. Combining the results of [ 19] with
the expressions in Eqs. ( 3.16) and ( 4.23), we can then
compute the leading-PN-order prediction for the ordi-
nary part of the CM memory. The result is
∆ K2,0 = − M
168
√
5
π
∫ u2
u1
du| ˙U2,2|2 +O(c−2), (4.24a)
∆ K4,0 = − M
453600√π
∫ u2
u1
du| ˙U2,2|2 +O(c−2). (4.24b)
We can then use Eqs. ( 4.9) and ( 4.10) to show that in
terms of the PN parameter x, Eq. ( 4.24) can be expressed
as
∆ K2,0 = −
√
5π
21 M 2η(x2 −x1) +O(c−2), (4.25a)
∆ K4,0 = −
√π
56700M 2η(x2 −x1) +O(c−2). (4.25b)
Thus, the nonlinear null part of the CM memory enters
at 1.5 PN orders higher than the ordinary part of the CM
20
memory. Moreover, the ordinary part of the CM memory
is nonoscillatory ( m = 0) at leading order, whereas the
null part is oscillatory ( m ⁄= 0).
The reader might then wonder why we compute the
nonlinear null part of the CM memory, when it is weaker
than the ordinary part, for quasicircular, nonspinning
compact binaries. We do so because, for the CM mem-
ory, it will be useful to understand which terms in the
gravitational waveform are responsible for generating the
eﬀect. For the spin memory, there is an easily identiﬁable
term in the GW strain that produces the eﬀect, when it
is integrated in time. It is also possible, in principle, to
measure the terms in the GWs that produce the spin
memory eﬀect with the next generation of ground-based
interferometers [
19] (and likely space-based interferome-
ters, too). To see if the terms in the GWs responsible
for the CM memory eﬀect might also be measured, we
must ﬁrst identify the pertinent terms. The nonlinear,
null part of the CM memory turns out to be the leading
PN-order eﬀect in the GW strain, as we discuss in more
detail in the next subsection.
D. GW modes that produce the CM memory eﬀect
Because the CM memory observable ∆ K is a potential
for a portion of the time integral of the electric-parity
part of the GW strain (with the terms that grow linearly
withu in nonradiative regions removed), then there must
be terms in the GWs that, when integrated in time, give
rise to the CM memory eﬀect. Because the moments
∆ Klm are the spherical harmonic modes of the potential
∆ K expanded in scalar harmonics, whereas the radiative
multipoles Ulm correspond to an expansion of the GW
strain in second-rank, symmetric-trace-free tensor har-
monics, there is the following relationship between these
quantities:
U (CM)
lm = 1
√
2
√
(l + 2)!
(l − 2)!
˙Klm. (4.26)
We used the notation U (CM)
lm to denote just the part of
Ulm that is related to the CM memory (Ulm will generally
have other contributions) and ˙Klm to denote the quantity
that when integrated in time gives rise to ∆ Klm.
1. Nonlinear and null part of the CM memory
We ﬁnd that the nonlinear, null part of the CM mem-
ory is a consequence of terms in the gravitational wave-
form of the form
U (CM)
3,1 = 1
96
√
30π [2
√
5(U3,3 ˙U2,−2 − ˙U3,3U2,−2)
+ 4
√
3(U3,−1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,−1U2,2) + 3
√
2U2,0 ˙U3,1]
+O(c−2), (4.27a)
U (CM)
3,3 = 1
96
√
30π [2
√
5(U3,1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,1U2,2)
− 5
√
2U2,0 ˙U3,3] +O(c−2), (4.27b)
for the l = 3 modes and
U (CM)
5,1 = 1
1680
√
165π
[(U3,3 ˙U2,−2 − ˙U3,3U2,−2)+
√
15(U3,−1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,−1U2,2) − 3
√
10U2,0 ˙U3,1]
+O(c−2), (4.27c)
U (CM)
5,3 = 1
240
√
1155π [
√
10(U3,1 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,1U2,2)
− 2U2,0 ˙U3,3] +O(c−2), (4.27d)
U (CM)
5,5 = 1
120
√
154π (U3,3 ˙U2,2 − ˙U3,3U2,2) +O(c−2),
(4.27e)
for the l = 5 modes.
Instead of directly substituting the expressions for the
multipole moments given in Eqs. ( 4.7) and ( 4.10) into
Eq. ( 4.27) to compute the analog of Eq. ( 4.22) for the
quantities U (CM)
lm , we note that for the m ⁄= 0 modes,
there is the simple relationship
˙Klm = −im
Mx3/2∆ Klm (4.28)
at the PN order at which we are calculating. By combin-
ing Eqs. (
4.22), ( 4.26), and ( 4.28), we can easily deter-
mine the results for U (CM)
lm in terms of x. It follows that
all the moments scale as x4e−imϕ, which means that they
are 3PN contributions to the gravitational waveform (for
the l = 3 modes they are relative 2.5PN-order correc-
tions, and for the l = 5 modes, they are relative 1.5PN-
order corrections). Because the 3PN waveform from com-
pact binaries has been computed to this order [
62], it is
possible to compare the expressions for U (CM)
lm with the
equivalent modes in the PN waveform. There are a few
subtleties about making this comparison that we will dis-
cuss further after computing the terms in the GWs that
produce the ordinary part of the CM memory eﬀect.
21
2. Ordinary part of the CM memory
Using Eq. ( 4.26) to convert the expressions for ∆ Kl,0
in Eq. ( 4.24) into expressions for U (CM)
l,0 , we ﬁnd that
U (CM)
2,0 = − M
84
√
15
π | ˙U2,2|2 +O(c−2), (4.29a)
U (CM)
4,0 = − M
75600
√
5
π | ˙U2,2|2 +O(c−2). (4.29b)
For these m = 0 modes, they can be expressed in terms
of x as
U (CM)
2,0 = − 128
7
√ π
15Mη 2x5 +O(c−2), (4.30a)
U (CM)
4,0 = − 32
4725
√ π
5Mη 2x5 +O(c−2). (4.30b)
Because the U (CM)
l,0 modes scale as x5, then they are a
4PN eﬀect in the gravitational waveform. The gravita-
tional waveform at 4PN order has not yet been computed,
which prohibits us from making a comparison with exist-
ing PN results. However, we anticipate that future PN
calculations will ﬁnd evidence for such terms.
E. Comparison with existing PN results
Because the null part of the CM memory arises from
a 3PN eﬀect in the gravitational waveform, and because
the PN waveform has been computed to this accuracy, it
would be a useful consistency check of the CM memory
eﬀect to identify certain terms in the PN expansion of
the gravitational waveform that are responsible for the
CM memory eﬀect. We ﬁnd that we can make such an
identiﬁcation in a certain approximation, which we will
describe in more detail.
Before we do so, however, we must clarify a few no-
tational diﬀerences between the PN results given in,
e.g., [
42] and those in this paper. The expressions for the
PN radiative (as well as canonical and source) multipole
moments in [
42] are expressed in terms of symmetric-
trace-free, spatial, rank-l tensors UL and VL rather than
the multipole moments Ulm and Vlm (which are scalar
functions of u). There are well-known prescriptions for
converting between the two types of moments, which are
described in [
30] (or more recently in [ 63], for example).
The relationships for the radiative mass moments are
given by
Ulm = 16π
(2l + 1)!!
√
(l + 1)(l + 2)
2l(l − 1) UL ¯Y L
lm, (4.31a)
UL =l!
4
√
2l(l − 1)
(l + 1)(l + 2)
∑
m
U lmY lm
L , (4.31b)
where Y lm
L are a set of basis functions for the rank- l,
symmetric-trace-free tensors [ 30], and the double facto-
rial means a product of all odd integers less than or equal
to (2l + 1). Similar relationships exist for the current
multipole moments VL andVlm, though we will not need
them in the subsequent discussion.
Having addressed the diﬀerences in notation, we must
identify the relevant terms in the PN waveform. Because
the CM memory eﬀect comes from the integral of the
product of radiative moments, then the corresponding
terms in the PN waveform must be able to be expressed
as an instantaneous product of radiative moments (at
the relevant PN order). Thus, the other eﬀects at 3PN
order in the waveform (contributions from time deriva-
tives of 3PN accurate near-zone multipole moments, from
components of a gauge transformation needed to relate
the near-zone moments to the intermediate canonical mo-
ments, and from tail and hereditary terms) will not be
needed here. The instantaneous and nonlinear terms in
the 3PN-accurate radiative moments, however, are ex-
pressed in terms of the canonical moments. We now
reproduce the expressions for these parts of the l = 3
and l = 5 radiative moments, which can be found, for
example, in Eqs. (95a) and (95e) of [
42]:
U (IN)
ijk = − 4
3M (3)
a⟨iM (3)
jk⟩a − 9
4M (4)
a⟨iM (2)
jk⟩a + 1
4M (2)
a⟨iM (4)
jk⟩a
− 3
4M (5)
a⟨iM (1)
jk⟩a + 1
4M (1)
a⟨iM (5)
jk⟩a + 1
12M (6)
a⟨iMjk⟩a
+ 1
4Ma⟨iM (6)
jk⟩a, (4.32a)
U (IN)
ijkpq = − 710
21 M (3)
⟨ijM (3)
kpq⟩ − 265
7 M (4)
⟨ijM (2)
kpq⟩
− 120
7 M (2)
⟨ijM (4)
kpq⟩ − 155
7 M (5)
⟨ijM (1)
kpq⟩−
41
7 M (1)
⟨ijM (5)
kpq⟩ − 34
7 M (6)
⟨ijMkpq⟩ − 14
7 M⟨ijM (6)
kpq⟩.
(4.32b)
The superscript “(IN)” is short for “instantaneous and
nonlinear,” the repeated index a is being summed over
in the ﬁrst three lines, and the angled brackets mean to
take the symmetric trace-free part of the tensor.
It is not immediately obvious how to relate the prod-
ucts of canonical moments that appear in Eq. (
4.32) to
the products of radiative moments that appear in the
GW modes that produce the CM memory eﬀect. The
reason is that the canonical moments that appear in
Eq. (
4.32) have fewer than l derivatives with respect
to time (where l is the multipole order of the diﬀerent
canonical moments that appear in the products of the
moments). Thus, we cannot directly use the analog of the
relationships in Eq. (
4.4) for the rank- l symmetric-trace-
free tensors to express the radiative moments in terms of
the canonical moments. Instead, we would have to ex-
press these derivatives of the canonical moments in terms
of integrals of the radiative moments by integrating an
expression like Eq. (
4.4). In performing this procedure,
we would need to introduce new constants of integration,
22
but we do not have a prescription for determining the
values of these constants.
Because the CM memory eﬀect involves a time inte-
gral of the GW strain, however, it is equally relevant to
know whether the time integral of the PN expressions in
Eq. (
4.32) agree with the time integral of the modes in
Eqs. ( 4.27) [after using the relationships in Eq. ( 4.31)].
In making this comparison, we can integrate by parts to
obtain an equivalent expression that involves a diﬀerent
linear combination of derivatives of the canonical mo-
ments (and boundary terms from integrating by parts).
If the boundary terms vanish, then the integrand is a new
expression for the relevant parts of the radiative moments
that give rise to the same CM memory eﬀect.
14
We will use this procedure of integrating in time, in-
tegrating by parts, and diﬀerentiating the expression to
get a new PN expression for the instantaneous, nonlinear
terms. In this procedure, we will integrate by parts so
that we can write the result in terms of products of the
radiative moments and their derivatives (but not their in-
tegrals). This will avoid issues with unknown constants
of integration, which were mentioned above. The result
of this process is that Eq. (
4.32) can be written as
U
′(IN)
ijk = 1
12 (Ua⟨i ˙Ujk⟩a − ˙Ua⟨iUjk⟩a), (4.33a)
U
′(IN)
ijkpq = 2
21 (U⟨ij ˙Ukpq⟩ − ˙U⟨ijUkpq⟩). (4.33b)
We have added an apostrophe to the modes U
′(IN)
L to in-
dicate that they were obtained from the expressions for
U (IN)
L in Eq. (
4.32) by integrating by parts and diﬀerenti-
ating the resulting expression [as well as using the analog
of Eq. (
4.4) for the symmetric-trace-free tensors]. With
the relationships in Eq. ( 4.31), we can then recover the
l = 3 and l = 5 modes given in Eq. ( 4.27), namely,
U
′(IN)
3m =U (CM)
3m , U
′(IN)
5m =U (CM)
5m , (4.34)
for odd integers m. Therefore, there are terms in the
already computed 3PN waveform that give rise to the
same CM memory eﬀect, under the prescription de-
scribed above for rewriting the instantaneous and non-
linear terms in the 3PN waveform.
14 A subtle issue will be whether the boundary terms vanish. Thi s
clearly will not be true if we consider the binary as it evolve s
between two nonzero frequencies x1 and x2, but this will also
break the assumption of a stationary-to-stationary transi tion
(as was further discussed in footnote 13). Thus, we will con-
sider the full evolution of the binary as it makes a stationar y-
to-stationary transition; this will eliminate the majorit y of the
boundary terms. However, there are some additional boundar y
terms that will not vanish in stationary regions, which occu r be-
cause of the GW memory eﬀect. These terms are of a suﬃciently
high PN order that we will not need to treat them at the PN ac-
curacy at which we perform the calculation. As a result, we ar e
able to ignore boundary terms when integrating by parts when
we make this comparison.
F. Discussion of PN results
Because the CM memory eﬀect arises from 3PN and
4PN terms in the GWs from a compact binary, it is of
interest to determine whether these terms in the gravi-
tational waveform could be detected by any current or
upcoming GW observatories. The GW memory could be
detected within the next decade after LIGO (as well as
Virgo and KAGRA) detects hundreds of binary-black-
hole mergers [
64]. This is possible because the eﬀect en-
ters at leading (Newtonian) order in the waveform, and
it has a distinctive dependence on time and on angu-
lar coordinates (it is nonoscillatory, and enters into the
m = 0 and l = 2, 4 modes of the gravitational waveform
for nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries at lead-
ing order). The spin memory eﬀect also has distinctive
time and angular dependencies (it enters into the l = 3,
m = 0 mode of the time-integrated gravitational wave-
form for nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries at
leading order); however, the related terms in the GWs are
of 2.5PN order in the waveform. This means that it will
likely be too weak to be detected by the current genera-
tion of ground-based detectors, but it could conceivably
be observed by the next generation of ground-based GW
detectors, like the Einstein Telescope [
19].
The GW modes related to the CM memory eﬀect seem
much more diﬃcult to detect. For the nonlinear part,
the modes appear as a 3PN order term in the waveform.
Speciﬁcally, for the l = 3 modes of nonspinning, quasi-
circular compact binaries, they are a 2.5PN-order cor-
rection to GW modes that vanish when the components
of the binary have the same mass (and thus are them-
selves a correction to the leading quadrupole waveform).
While the small amplitude of the eﬀect will make de-
tecting it challenging, there are two other properties of
the PN waveform that seem to prohibit being able to
identify the terms in the GWs that produce the nonlin-
ear null part of the CM memory eﬀect. First, although
we showed that U (IN)
lm can be reexpressed as U
′(IN)
lm [or
equivalently U (CM)
lm ] for harmonics with l = 3, 5 and m
odd in a stationary-to-stationary transition, outside of
this context, U (IN)
lm and U (CM)
lm can be diﬀerent. Second,
at 3PN order, there are additional terms that arise from
nonlinear interactions in the near zone of the compact bi-
nary that produce eﬀects in the gravitational waveform
that have (at least at this PN order) the same time de-
pendence as those responsible for the CM memory (but
they would have a diﬀerent dependence on angular co-
ordinates). The full gravitational waveform is a sum of
these diﬀerent contributions, and it is not clear how ob-
servationally to separate out the part related to the non-
linear null CM memory eﬀect from these other similar
eﬀects from a given compact-binary source.
Next, we consider the ordinary part of the CM memory
eﬀect. For nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries,
it is a 4PN correction to the same GW multipole mo-
ments in which the GW memory appears. While it is of
23
a high PN order, it has a diﬀerent angular dependence
(the ratio of the l = 2 and l = 4 modes diﬀers from that
of the GW memory). Perhaps more importantly, it also
has a diﬀerent time dependence than the GW memory
does. It grows with time like the instantaneous ﬂux of
energy does, unlike the GW memory, which grows with
time as the total radiated energy does.
We can roughly estimate whether these modes are de-
tectable by computing the signal-to-noise ratio of the
part of the GWs that produce the ordinary CM memory
eﬀect. For our source, we choose a binary, like the ﬁrst
GW150914 detection by LIGO [
5], and for our detector,
we use the Einstein Telescope (speciﬁcally the analytical
ﬁt for the ET-B noise curve given in [
65]). An event like
GW150914 will likely be one of the loudest events to be
observed by the Einstein Telescope, because its signal-
to-noise ratio could be in the thousands [
19]. Following
a procedure similar to that described in [ 19] to compute
the signal-to-noise ratio, we ﬁnd that the GW modes that
produce the ordinary part of the CM memory eﬀect have
a signal-to-noise ratio that is several orders of magnitude
less than unity. Thus, it is diﬃcult to imagine that it will
be detected by ground-based GW detectors from individ-
ual events. Attempting to stack multiple events to build
evidence for the CM memory also seems diﬃcult, because
the amplitude of the eﬀect in the GWs is signiﬁcantly
smaller than the background noise in the detector. The
prospects for other detectors like the space-based LISA
mission [
66] or pulsar timing arrays (e.g., [ 67]) we expect
will be similar.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we investigated the ﬂux of (super)
angular momentum in asymptotically ﬂat spacetimes.
We showed that within the context of stationary-to-
stationary transitions the change in the (super) angu-
lar momentum between two cuts is not invariant under
supertranslations. The diﬀerence produced by a super-
translation is related to the change in supermomentum,
the GW memory, and the supertranslation itself. Next,
we focused on the ﬂux of the center-of-mass part of the
angular momentum. We argued that the change in the
(super-) CM angular momentum (although not invari-
ant under supertranslations) contains additional infor-
mation about an isolated system that is not contained in
the change in the 4-momentum, intrinsic (super) angu-
lar momentum, supermomentum, GW memory, or spin
memory. We then derived a new multipolar expression
for the ﬂux of CM angular momentum in terms of a set
of radiative multipole moments of the GW strain.
The next part of the paper was devoted to deﬁning the
CM memory eﬀect. The eﬀect is related to the time in-
tegral of the electric-parity part of the GW strain, with
the part that grows linearly with retarded time (from
the ordinary GW memory) removed. The quantity we
deﬁned is invariant under inﬁnitesimal supertranslations.
We then derived an expression for the multipole moments
of this CM memory eﬀect in terms of the radiative mul-
tipoles of the GW strain and the multipole moments of
the change in the super-CM angular momentum.
The ﬁnal part of the paper was devoted to analyz-
ing nonspinning, quasicircular compact binaries, which
we treated in the post-Newtonian approximation. We
showed that binaries with components with unequal
masses will typically have a nonzero ﬂux of CM angu-
lar momentum. The eﬀect was quite weak (of a high PN
order), because with the freedom to shift the reference
time about which the ﬂux is computed, it was possible
to set the change in the CM angular momentum to be
zero through 2.5PN order (which corresponds to a 6PN-
order eﬀect in the near-zone equations of motion).
Lastly, we computed the CM memory eﬀect for these
binaries, and we found that the ordinary part of the CM
memory was a larger (lower PN-order) eﬀect than the
nonlinear null part of the memory. The opposite is true
for the GW memory and the spin memory eﬀects. The
nonlinear, null part of the CM memory arises from a 3PN
term in the GWs, which we could identify with a certain
part of the 3PN gravitational waveform from nonspin-
ning, quasicircular compact binaries. The ordinary part
of the CM memory comes from a 4PN term in the GWs,
which has not yet been computed in PN theory. The null
part of the CM memory eﬀect turned out to be degen-
erate with other nonlinear terms in the PN waveform,
which made it seem diﬃcult to identify and measure the
eﬀect with current or future GW detectors. The ordinary
part of the CM memory is measurable in principle, but
it was suﬃciently weak that it seemed unlikely that any
upcoming GW interferometers or a pulsar timing array
would be able to observe the eﬀect. Thus, we suspect
that the results in this paper will be more pertinent for
helping to understand the theoretical properties of the
extended BMS charges than for highlighting observable
GW eﬀects related to the changes in these charges from
compact binaries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
It is my pleasure to thank B´ eatrice Bonga, Yanbei
Chen, Zachary Mark, Leo Stein, and Aaron Zimmer-
man for helpful discussions about the properties of the
center-of-mass part of the angular momentum. I am also
grateful to Thomas M¨ adler for his correspondence about
the evolution equations in the Bondi-Sachs framework
and his suggestions for improvements in Sec.
II. I am
appreciative for the useful comments Samaya Nissanke
provided on a draft of this paper. Finally, I thank an
anonymous referee for pointing out several important ref-
erences that I had overlooked. This work is part of the re-
search program Innovational Research Incentives Scheme
(Vernieuwingsimpuls), which is ﬁnanced by the Nether-
lands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research through the
NWO VIDI Grant No. 639.042.612-Nissanke.
24
[1] H. Bondi, M. G. J. van der Burg, and A. W. K.
Metzner, “Gravitational Waves in General Relativity.
VII. Waves from Axi-Symmetric Isolated Systems,”
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 269, 21–52 (1962) .
[2] R. K. Sachs, “Gravitational Waves in General Relativ-
ity. VIII. Waves in Asymptotically Flat Space-Time,”
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 270, 103–126 (1962) .
[3] R. Sachs, “Asymptotic symmetries in gravitational the-
ory,” Phys. Rev. 128, 2851–2864 (1962) .
[4] T. M¨ adler and J. Winicour, “Bondi-Sachs
Formalism,” Scholarpedia 11, 33528 (2016) ,
arXiv:1609.01731 [gr-qc] .
[5] B. P. Abbott et al. (Virgo, LIGO Scientiﬁc), “Obser-
vation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black
Hole Merger,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 061102 (2016) ,
arXiv:1602.03837 [gr-qc] .
[6] B. P. Abbott et al. (Virgo, LIGO Scientiﬁc), “Bi-
nary Black Hole Mergers in the ﬁrst Advanced
LIGO Observing Run,”
Phys. Rev. X 6, 041015 (2016) ,
arXiv:1606.04856 [gr-qc] .
[7] B. P. Abbott et al. (VIRGO, LIGO Scien-
tiﬁc), “GW170104: Observation of a 50-Solar-
Mass Binary Black Hole Coalescence at Red-
shift 0.2,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 221101 (2017) ,
arXiv:1706.01812 [gr-qc] .
[8] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo),
“GW170608: Observation of a 19-solar-mass Binary
Black Hole Coalescence,”
Astrophys. J. 851, L35 (2017) ,
arXiv:1711.05578 [astro-ph.HE] .
[9] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo),
“GW170814: A Three-Detector Observation of
Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole
Coalescence,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 141101 (2017) ,
arXiv:1709.09660 [gr-qc] .
[10] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo),
“GW170817: Observation of Gravitational
Waves from a Binary Neutron Star In-
spiral,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 161101 (2017) ,
arXiv:1710.05832 [gr-qc] .
[11] R. M. Wald and A. Zoupas, “General deﬁnition of
’conserved quantities’ in general relativity and other
theories of gravity,”
Phys. Rev. D 61, 084027 (2000) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/9911095 [gr-qc] .
[12] G. Barnich and C. Troessaert, “Symmetries of asymp-
totically ﬂat 4 dimensional spacetimes at null in-
ﬁnity revisited,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 111103 (2010) ,
arXiv:0909.2617 [gr-qc] .
[13] G. Barnich and C. Troessaert, “Aspects of the BMS/CFT
correspondence,” J. High Energy Phys. 05, 062 (2010) ,
arXiv:1001.1541 [hep-th] .
[14] M. Campiglia and A. Laddha, “Asymp-
totic symmetries and subleading soft gravi-
ton theorem,”
Phys. Rev. D 90, 124028 (2014) ,
arXiv:1408.2228 [hep-th] .
[15] M. Campiglia and A. Laddha, “New
symmetries for the Gravitational S-
matrix,”
J. High Energy Phys. 04, 076 (2015) ,
arXiv:1502.02318 [hep-th] .
[16] ´E. ´E. Flanagan and D. A. Nichols, “Con-
served charges of the extended Bondi-Metzner-
Sachs algebra,”
Phys. Rev. D 95, 044002 (2017) ,
arXiv:1510.03386 [hep-th] .
[17] G. Barnich and C. Troessaert, “BMS charge
algebra,” J. High Energy Phys. 12, 105 (2011) ,
arXiv:1106.0213 [hep-th] .
[18] S. W. Hawking, M. J. Perry, and A. Strominger,
“Superrotation Charge and Supertranslation Hair
on Black Holes,”
J. High Energy Phys. 05, 161 (2017) ,
arXiv:1611.09175 [hep-th] .
[19] D. A. Nichols, “Spin memory eﬀect for com-
pact binaries in the post-Newtonian ap-
proximation,”
Phys. Rev. D 95, 084048 (2017) ,
arXiv:1702.03300 [gr-qc] .
[20] Y. B. Zel’dovich and A. G. Polnarev, “Radiation of grav-
itational waves by a cluster of superdense stars,” Sov.
Astron. 18, 17 (1974).
[21] D. Christodoulou, “Nonlinear nature of grav-
itation and gravitational-wave experiments,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1486–1489 (1991) .
[22] P. N. Payne, “Smarr’s zero-frequency-limit calculati on,”
Phys. Rev. D 28, 1894–1897 (1983) .
[23] S. Weinberg, “Infrared photons and gravitons,”
Phys. Rev. 140, B516–B524 (1965) .
[24] L. Blanchet and T. Damour, “Hereditary eﬀects in gravi-
tational radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 46, 4304–4319 (1992) .
[25] L. Blanchet, “Gravitational radiation from relativis -
tic sources,” in Relativistic gravitation and gravita-
tional radiation: Proceedings of the Les Houches School
of Physics , edited by J. A. Marck and J. P. La-
sota (Cambridge University Press, 1996) pp. 33–66,
arXiv:gr-qc/9607025 [gr-qc] .
[26] E. T. Newman and R. Penrose, “Note
on the Bondi-Metzner-Sachs group,”
J. Math. Phys. 7, 863–870 (1966) .
[27] L. Bieri and D. Garﬁnkle, “Perturbative and
gauge invariant treatment of gravitational
wave memory,”
Phys. Rev. D 89, 084039 (2014) ,
arXiv:1312.6871 [gr-qc] .
[28] A. Strominger and A. Zhiboedov, “Gravita-
tional Memory, BMS Supertranslations and Soft
Theorems,”
J. High Energy Phys. 01, 086 (2016) ,
arXiv:1411.5745 [hep-th] .
[29] S. Pasterski, A. Strominger, and A. Zhi-
boedov, “New Gravitational Memo-
ries,”
J. High Energy Phys. 12, 053 (2016) ,
arXiv:1502.06120 [hep-th] .
[30] K. S. Thorne, “Multipole expansions of gravitational r a-
diation,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 299–339 (1980) .
[31] ´E. ´E. Flanagan, A. M. Grant, A. I. Harte, and
D. A. Nichols, “Gravitational-wave memory observ-
ables,” (2018), In Preparation.
[32] M. Punturo et al. , “The Einstein Telescope: A
third-generation gravitational wave observatory,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 27, 194002 (2010) .
[33] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc), “Exploring the
Sensitivity of Next Generation Gravitational Wave De-
tectors,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 34, 044001 (2017) ,
arXiv:1607.08697 [astro-ph.IM] .
[34] R. M. Wald, General Relativity (Chicago University
Press, Chicago, USA, 1984).
[35] M. G. J. van der Burg, “Gravitational Waves
in General Relativity. IX. Conserved Quantities,”
25
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 294, 112–122 (1966) .
[36] J. Winicour, “Newtonian gravity on the null cone,”
J. Math. Phys. 24, 1193–1198 (1983) .
[37] R. Geroch, “Asymptotic structure of space-time,” in
Asymptotic Structure of Space-Time , edited by F. P. Es-
posito and L. Witten (Plenum Press, New York, 1977).
[38] T. M¨ adler and J. Winicour, “The sky pattern
of the linearized gravitational memory eﬀect,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 33, 175006 (2016) ,
arXiv:1605.01273 [gr-qc] .
[39] E. Newman and R. Penrose, “An Approach to grav-
itational radiation by a method of spin coeﬃcients,”
J. Math. Phys. 3, 566–578 (1962) .
[40] T. M. Adamo, C. N. Kozameh, and E. T. New-
man, “Null Geodesic Congruences, Asymptoti-
cally Flat Space-Times and Their Physical In-
terpretation,”
Living Rev. Relativ. 15, 1 (2012) ,
arXiv:0906.2155 [gr-qc] .
[41] J. Frauendiener, “Note on the memory eﬀect,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 9, 1639–1641 (1992) .
[42] L. Blanchet, “Gravitational Radiation from
Post-Newtonian Sources and Inspiralling Com-
pact Binaries,”
Living Rev. Relativ. 17, 2 (2014) ,
arXiv:1310.1528 [gr-qc] .
[43] N. T. Bishop, R. Gomez, L. Lehner, and J. Winicour,
“Cauchy characteristic extraction in numerical relativ-
ity,”
Phys. Rev. D 54, 6153–6165 (1996) .
[44] N. T. Bishop, R. Gomez, L. Lehner, M. Ma-
haraj, and J. Winicour, “High powered gravita-
tional news,”
Phys. Rev. D 56, 6298–6309 (1997) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/9708065 [gr-qc] .
[45] E. T. Newman and R. Penrose, “New conservation laws
for zero rest-mass ﬁelds in asymptotically ﬂat space-
time,”
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 305, 175–204 (1968) .
[46] P. T. Chrusciel, J. Jezierski, and J. Kijowski,
Hamiltonian ﬁeld theory in the radiating regime
(Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002).
[47] G. Comp` ere and J. Long, “Vacua of the grav-
itational ﬁeld,” J. High Energy Phys. 07, 137 (2016) ,
arXiv:1601.04958 [hep-th] .
[48] A. Ashtekar and B. Bonga, “On the ambiguity in
the notion of transverse traceless modes of grav-
itational waves,”
Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 49, 122 (2017) ,
arXiv:1707.09914 [gr-qc] .
[49] T. M¨ adler and J. Winicour, “Radiation Memory,
Boosted Schwarzschild Spacetimes and Supertrans-
lations,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 34, 115009 (2017) ,
arXiv:1701.02556 [gr-qc] .
[50] V. C. de Andrade, L. Blanchet, and G. Faye,
“Third post-Newtonian dynamics of com-
pact binaries: Noetherian conserved quanti-
ties and equivalence between the harmonic co-
ordinate and ADM Hamiltonian formalisms,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 18, 753–778 (2001) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/0011063 [gr-qc] .
[51] C. J. Handmer, B. Szil´ agyi, and J. Winicour,
“Spectral Cauchy Characteristic Extraction of
strain, news and gravitational radiation ﬂux,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 33, 225007 (2016) ,
arXiv:1605.04332 [gr-qc] .
[52] ´E. ´E. Flanagan and D. A. Nichols, “Observer depen-
dence of angular momentum in general relativity and its
relationship to the gravitational-wave memory eﬀect,”
Phys. Rev. D 92, 084057 (2015) , [Erratum: Phys. Rev.
D 93, 049905 (2016)], arXiv:1411.4599 [gr-qc] .
[53] ´E. ´E. Flanagan, D. A. Nichols, L. C. Stein,
and J. Vines, “Prescriptions for measuring and
transporting local angular momenta in gen-
eral relativity,”
Phys. Rev. D 93, 104007 (2016) ,
arXiv:1602.01847 [gr-qc] .
[54] L. Boyle, M. Kesden, and S. Nissanke, “Bi-
nary black hole merger: Symmetry and the spin
expansion,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 151101 (2008) ,
arXiv:0709.0299 [gr-qc] .
[55] T. Damour and A. Gopakumar, “Gravitational recoil
during binary black hole coalescence using the eﬀective
one body approach,”
Phys. Rev. D 73, 124006 (2006) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/0602117 [gr-qc] .
[56] M. J. Fitchett, “The inﬂuence of gravita-
tional wave momentum losses on the centre of
mass motion of a Newtonian binary system,”
Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 203, 1049–1062 (1983) .
[57] L. Blanchet, M. S. S. Qusailah, and C. M. Will, “Gravi-
tational recoil of inspiralling black-hole binaries to sec ond
post-Newtonian order,” Astrophys. J. 635, 508 (2005) ,
arXiv:astro-ph/0507692 [astro-ph] .
[58] C. K. Mishra, K. G. Arun, and B. R. Iyer, “The
2.5PN linear momentum ﬂux and associated recoil from
inspiralling compact binaries in quasi-circular orbits:
Nonspinning case,”
Phys. Rev. D 85, 044021 (2012) ,
[Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 87, 069908 (2013)],
arXiv:1111.2701 [gr-qc] .
[59] L. Blanchet, “Time asymmetric structure of gravitatio nal
radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 47, 4392–4420 (1993) .
[60] L. Blanchet, “Gravitational radiation reac-
tion and balance equations to post-Newtonian
order,”
Phys. Rev. D 55, 714–732 (1997) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/9609049 [gr-qc] .
[61] L. Bernard, L. Blanchet, G. Faye, and T. Marchand,
“Center-of-Mass Equations of Motion and Conserved
Integrals of Compact Binary Systems at the Fourth Post-
Newtonian Order,”
Phys. Rev. D 97, 044037 (2018) ,
arXiv:1711.00283 [gr-qc] .
[62] L. Blanchet, G. Faye, B. R. Iyer, and S. Sinha,
“The Third post-Newtonian gravitational wave po-
larisations and associated spherical harmonic modes
for inspiralling compact binaries in quasi-circular
orbits,”
Classical Quantum Gravity 25, 165003 (2008) ,
[Erratum: Classcal Quantum Gravity 29, 239501 (2012)],
arXiv:0802.1249 [gr-qc] .
[63] M. Favata, “Post-Newtonian corrections
to the gravitational-wave memory for
quasi-circular, inspiralling compact bi-
naries,”
Phys. Rev. D 80, 024002 (2009) ,
arXiv:0812.0069 [gr-qc] .
[64] P. D. Lasky, E. Thrane, Y. Levin, J. Black-
man, and Y. Chen, “Detecting gravitational-
wave memory with LIGO: implications of
GW150914,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 061102 (2016) ,
arXiv:1605.01415 [astro-ph.HE] .
[65] T. Regimbau et al. , “A Mock Data Chal-
lenge for the Einstein Gravitational-Wave
Telescope,”
Phys. Rev. D 86, 122001 (2012) ,
arXiv:1201.3563 [gr-qc] .
[66] H. Audley et al. , “Laser Interferometer Space Antenna,”
(2017), arXiv:1702.00786 [astro-ph.IM] .
26
[67] R. N. Manchester, “The International Pulsar Timing
Array,” Classical Quantum Gravity 30, 224010 (2013) ,
arXiv:1309.7392 [astro-ph.IM] .